my name is virinchiBlockchain Governance
 OceanofPDF.com
The MIT Press Essential Knowledge Series
 A complete list of books in this series can be found online at
 https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/series/mit-press-essential-knowledge-series.
 OceanofPDF.com
Blockchain Governance
 Primavera De Filippi, Wessel Reijers, and Morshed Mannan
 The MIT Press | Cambridge, Massachusetts | London, England
 OceanofPDF.com
© 2024 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used to train artificial intelligence systems or
 reproduced in any form by any electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying,
 recording, or information storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher.
 The MIT Press would like to thank the anonymous peer reviewers who provided comments on
 drafts of this book. The generous work of academic experts is essential for establishing the
 authority and quality of our publications. We acknowledge with gratitude the contributions of these
 otherwise uncredited readers.
 This book was set in Chaparral Pro by New Best-set Typesetters Ltd.
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
 Names: De Filippi, Primavera, author. | Reijers, Wessel, 1989- author. | Mannan, Morshed, 1990
author.
 Title: Blockchain governance / Primavera De Filippi, Wessel Reijers, and Morshed Mannan.
 Description: Cambridge, Massachusetts : The MIT Press, [2024] | Series: The MIT Press essential
 knowledge series | Includes bibliographical references and index.
 Identifiers: LCCN 2023053314 (print) | LCCN 2023053315 (ebook) | ISBN 9780262549059
 (paperback) | ISBN 9780262379861 (epub) | ISBN 9780262379878 (pdf)
 Subjects: LCSH: Blockchains (Databases)—Government policy. | Internet governance. |
 Technology and law.
 Classification: LCC QA76.9.B56 D455 2024 (print) | LCC QA76.9.B56 (ebook) | DDC 005.75/88
 —dc23/eng/20240215
 LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023053314
 LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023053315
 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
 OceanofPDF.com
 d_r0
Contents
 Series Foreword
 Preface
 1 New Cambrian Explosion
 2 Blockchain
 3 Rule of Code
 4 Problem of Trust
 5 States of Exception
 6 Alegality
 7 Legitimacy
 8 Cryptopia
 Glossary
 Notes
 Bibliography
 Further Reading
 Index
 OceanofPDF.com
Series Foreword
 The MIT Press Essential Knowledge series offers accessible, concise,
 beautifully produced pocket-size books on topics of current interest. Written
 by leading thinkers, the books in this series deliver expert overviews of
 subjects that range from the cultural and the historical to the scientific and
 the technical.
 In today’s era of instant information gratification, we have ready access
 to opinions, rationalizations, and superficial descriptions. Much harder to
 come by is the foundational knowledge that informs a principled
 understanding of the world. Essential Knowledge books fill that need.
 Synthesizing specialized subject matter for nonspecialists and engaging
 critical topics through fundamentals, each of these compact volumes offers
 readers a point of access to complex ideas.
 OceanofPDF.com
Preface
 In the spring of 2023, when we were wrapping up the book that you are
 now reading, a remarkable gathering happened on the coast of the Adriatic,
 in a resort near Tivat in Montenegro. A few hundred people, including two
 of us, assembled in Zuzalu, a pop-up city initiated by (among others) the
 visionary founder of the Ethereum blockchain, Vitalik Buterin. People from
 all kinds of backgrounds—blockchain engineers and computer scientists,
 artists and philosophers, entrepreneurs and lawyers, and so forth—came
 together to discuss a variety of topics, from artificial intelligence to human
 longevity and the future of the nation-state.
 Zuzalu was home to a variety of ideologies and interests. Some residents
 were involved in establishing zones that were beyond the jurisdiction of any
 state’s legal system so that they could test life extension treatments. For
 them, Zuzalu was a tentative manifestation of the “network state,” a concept
 introduced by Silicon Valley tech entrepreneur Balaji Srinivasan, which
 envisions dispersed networks of people and capital ultimately gaining
 recognition as sovereign entities. The idea of the network state builds on
 libertarian visions that have a long history. This ranges from the secretive
 Galt’s Gulch, an enclave in Ayn Rand’s Atlas Shrugged that survives the
 collapse of ineffective government, to seaborne platforms in the high seas
 that, according to Peter Thiel, would allow humankind to escape politics
 and secure spaces safe for capitalism and freedom. Yet, for many other
 residents, the appeal of Zuzalu was the opportunity it provided for
 imagining postcapitalist futures within existing nation-states and developing
 new tools and practices for societal transformation. In this sense, its ethos
 was more like Calafou, a self-managed eco-industrial colony in Catalonia
 where Buterin spent time in the months leading to the drafting of the
 Ethereum white paper.
 A shared interest of Zuzalu residents was that the world’s established
 institutions, and governance as we now know it, are not the only tools we
 have to govern society. We don’t need to be citizens of nation-states with
 defined territories and the rights and duties that traditional citizenship
entails. Instead, we can move between “digital tribes” and “network
 archipelagos,” which may exist anywhere, at any time. We would have
 multiple citizenships and belong to multiple networks, all based on our
 personal interests that would sometimes converge and sometimes diverge.
 For some, the network state promises a do-over, an opportunity to dismantle
 the regulations, red tape, and bureaucracy that characterize modern states
 and to rebuild societies as bastions of human autonomy, political liberty,
 and economic freedom. For others, the network state is a buzzword that is
 being used to market wild colonial enterprises, from Central America to the
 South Pacific, that operate without democratic oversight, threaten hard-won
 statutory protections, and place local communities and institutions at risk.
 In this way, some have tried to turn Puerto Rico into a crypto tax haven and
 test bed for experimenting with new technologies, while leeching on to the
 local population.
 In contrast, other visions do not see exit as the central organizing
 principle of global governance but rather interdependence. In the sessions
 two of us convened at Zuzalu, we discussed the ideas of “coordi-nations”
 and “new network sovereignties,” which can leverage blockchains and
 other technologies (e.g., for identity management) but are primarily
 intended to foster human cooperation at local and global levels through the
 cultivation of shared values, participatory governance, and the
 mutualization of resources. Instead of privatizing public goods or gnawing
 away at the sovereignty of the state, coordi-nations would coexist with the
 state and meet needs that states do not. Whatever your views on this subject
 may be, for us Zuzalu was akin to an ancient Greek agora, a place where
 people could freely exchange utopian ideas through agreement and
 contestation.
 In short, the future of governance was a core theme of the discussions
 that took place in the assemblies and salons at Zuzalu. It is also a subject
 that we collectively, and individually, have been researching for several
 years within various contexts. While blockchain communities love to
 experiment and speculate about the modes of governance of the future—
 invariably powered by blockchain—we wanted to put ourselves at the
 intersection of theory and practice. On the one hand, researching blockchain
 inevitably means getting one’s hands dirty and engaging with the world of
 practice—for instance, by applying ethnographic methods and actively
 engaging with blockchain communities. While we do not have a significant
stake in any of the blockchain projects that feature in this book, we have
 embedded ourselves in blockchain communities as a way of conducting
 research, to understand this world and its working from the inside out. On
 the other hand, writing this book required us to maintain a critical distance.
 Delving into political and legal theory, we engaged with old and
 contemporary ideas derived from the literature to critically assess the claims
 of blockchain proponents concerning the revolutionary new forms of
 governance this technology offers and the sweeping implications it may
 have. What does it mean, we ask, for blockchain technology to be
 “trustless” and “alegal”? Are these technical systems immune to political
 challenges like states of emergency, and can the governance of these
 systems ever be made legitimate?
 At the time of writing this preface, in March 2024, the ecosystem of
 blockchain technology seems to have moved to a new stage. In the wake of
 the scandals surrounding some of the major exchanges, FTX and Binance,
 and the spectacular fall of industry-leading figures like Sam Bankman
Fried, a crypto winter set in. After years of attention and hype, blockchain
 technology is somewhat out of the limelight, with the big boom in artificial
 intelligence applications dominating global attention. This, however, has
 also opened up two new pathways for the maturity of blockchain
 technology and blockchain governance. First, as Buterin stressed on
 multiple occasions, without the burden of the speculative bubble,
 blockchain projects may finally return (or perhaps, progress) to their roots
 in cypherpunk ideology. Perhaps more generally, without having to commit
 to a particular ideology, blockchain communities and policymakers may
 find the space and time to reflect on the deeper political and legal issues
 faced by blockchain ecosystems. We hope that this book will provide a
 starting point for these reflections. Second, and relatedly, ongoing
 legislative and regulatory activity has provided greater clarity about the
 rules applicable to this technology and the crypto-industry and has provided
 insight into the attitudes of policymakers toward both. On the one hand,
 through legislation such as the EU’s recent Markets in Crypto-Assets
 regulation, we have greater certainty about the terms under which certain
 crypto asset services can be provided. On the other hand, new regulations or
 the application of existing laws may be poorly suited for the development
 of this technological innovation or even ineffective in achieving their
 intended purposes. Cases concerning economic sanctions on blockchain
based software systems and the liability of members of decentralized
 autonomous organizations (DAOs) that are discussed in this book reveal
 some of the shortcomings of the prevailing “regulation by enforcement”
 approach. Instead, we elaborate on a “regulation by governance” approach
 that seeks to meet important public policy objectives through technical
 (e.g., new governance technologies) and social means (e.g., social norms
 cultivation) that are compatible with the particular features of blockchain
 technology and the industry as a whole. As regulatory activity continues to
 grow apace, we hope that the concerns and recommendations we mention
 also receive consideration.
 This book results from years of close collaboration, and we, the authors,
 have equally contributed to the research and writing of this manuscript. We
 would like to take this opportunity to thank the many people without whom
 this book would not have been possible. First, these include members of the
 ERC project BlockchainGov, especially Kelsie Nabben, Sofia Cossar, Silke
 Noa, and Tara Merk. Second, we have gained valuable input from
 colleagues, most notably Nathan Schneider, Eric Alston, Liav Orgad, Ellie
 Rennie, and Jason Potts. We would not have had the time and resources to
 finish the book without the generous support of the European Research
 Council (grant number 865856 under the European Union’s Horizon 2020
 Research and Innovation Programme) and the supportive environments of
 CERSA, the Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society at Harvard
 University, the European University Institute, and the University of Vienna.
 Finally, we would like to thank our families and friends for their patience
 and support while we worked on this manuscript.
 OceanofPDF.com
1
 New Cambrian Explosion
 We have sealed ourselves away behind our money, growing inward, generating a
 seamless universe of self.
 —William Gibson, Neuromancer1
 Cambrian Explosion
 In 1992, Francis Fukuyama announced the “end of history,” signaling the
 end of an evolutionary process in terms of governance structures.2 The
 world had found a lasting collection of stable forms of governance:
 representative democracies, capitalist firms, and civil society organizations,
 such as nonprofit associations and foundations. In a Hegelian vein,
 Fukuyama believed that liberal democracy was the endpoint of a long
 historical progress, the arrival of the Absolute Spirit. His message was
 symptomatic of the optimistic spirit of his time. Just three years before, the
 Iron Curtain had fallen and America had emerged as the global hegemon,
 condemning the Soviet experiment to the dustbin of history. An increasing
 number of countries adopted liberal-democratic means of government and
 embraced capitalism, and authoritarianism was in apparent decline.
 Two thousand years earlier, the philosopher Aristotle painted a very
 different picture about the possibility of realizing an ideal system of
 governance. Criticizing his mentor Plato, he lamented the preoccupation of
 philosophers with the “ideal state” such as Plato’s utopian vision of a
 republic governed by philosopher-citizens. Instead, he believed, one should
 start inquiring into politics empirically, by simply looking around. Ancient
 Greece had witnessed a unique historical moment with the emergence of the
 polis, the city state. Rather than being characterized by uniformity, city
 states were extremely diverse.
 In The Politics, Aristotle surveyed the actual constitutions of the city
 states and the hugely diverse ways in which they organize property rights,
establish citizenship rights, and make decisions. Phaleas of Chalcedon, for
 instance, proposed an extremely egalitarian property regime, where the rich
 would donate their inheritance to the poor.3 Hippodamus of Miletus tried to
 implement a class-based system, where the population was divided into
 three groups: craftsmen, farmers, and soldiers.4 Sparta added an interesting
 gender dimension to the governance of its city state: while men went off to
 war, women were often in charge of ruling the city, much to Aristotle’s
 dismay.5 Carthage had a system in which the kings were not destined to rule
 by birthright but were elected based on their merit and wealth.6 Aristotle
 also recounted the great innovations brought about by Solon, who abolished
 the oligarchy, put an end to some forms of slavery, and established
 “ancestral democracy.” Law courts in Athens were elected by lottery rather
 than appointed on aristocratic grounds.7
 At that time, ancient Greece experienced a “Cambrian explosion” of
 forms of governance. This is a metaphorical reference to an interval of a
 few million years about 500 million years ago in which the geological
 records show an extremely quick and prolific diversification of organic life.
 Biological evolution, it appears, is not linear; it moves dynamically between
 greater diversification and greater homogenization. The same, at times,
 applies to the ways humans govern their societies. As Graeber and
 Wengrow recently argued, our modern understanding of how governance
 evolved is still very much in line with Fukuyama’s thesis.8 Coming from
 the likes of Hobbes and Rousseau, we often believe in a linear progression
 of political evolution, from a (peaceful or brutish) state of nature to the
 sovereign nation state. Yet, historical records often disagree. Prehistory was
 teeming with “social experiments . . . resembling a carnival parade of
 political forms.”9 Examples include popular assemblies in ancient
 Mesopotamia and urban democracies in ancient cities in Middle America.
 And such diversity recurs in the historical records. The Italian city states,
 like Siena and Bologna, saw the emergence of communes with citizen
 assemblies and great variety in their constitutions.10 Similarly, the wild
 growth of utopian communities in the United States in the nineteenth
 century was highly diversified: some of them were deeply conservative and
 authoritarian, while others established surprisingly progressive governance
 principles, like sexual freedom and gender equality.11
Certainly, many factors play a role in Cambrian explosions of human
 governance, and one of these is undeniably technology. Ancient Greece and
 its many colonies would not have been imaginable without agricultural
 innovations and revolutionary ways of ship building, which produced ships
 like the trireme. The Italian city states thrived because of the increase in
 trade, the result of naval innovations, the building of infrastructure, and new
 financial tools such as double-entry bookkeeping. And nineteenth-century
 utopian experiments, like Robert Owen’s New Harmony, would not have
 been conceivable without the industrial technology that enabled
 transatlantic long-distance travel and communication. Technology has also
 played an important role in establishing new, often utopian, political visions
 that would inform the shaping of actual constitutions. As Lewis Mumford
 argued, visions of a “collective human machine” were considered political
 blueprints for how to govern society12—be they the slave-machine that built
 the pyramids in Egypt, offering a blueprint for absolute kingly rule, or the
 sailor-machine that navigated the trireme across the Aegean Sea, whose
 steersman or kybernetes provided the blueprint for the guardian class of
 philosopher-citizens. In a similar vein, the role of mechanical technologies
 like the astronomical clock contributed to shaping Hobbes’s idea of the
 sovereign as a spirit-machine, while the steam engine participated in the
 shaping of utopian dreamscapes like the ones established by Saint-Simon.
 This new role of technology is becoming increasingly explicit in the
 twenty-first century. Rather than being an enabling factor, or an inspiration
 for utopian ideas of governance, technology is gaining political force and is
 becoming a form of governance in and of itself. This was not yet the case in
 the mechanical age, for—as Newton believed—even the perfect clockwork
 that was the universe needed a prime mover other than itself: the
 watchmaker (i.e., God). Since the invention of the Turing machine,
 however, symbolic machines now share a faculty that was deemed
 exclusively human, namely the ability to make decisions. Today, machine
made decisions are all around us, nudging us, guiding us, and sometimes
 even coercing us. Recommendation algorithms decide what content or ads
 we get to see online, while content moderation systems decide what will be
 hidden from view.
 Yet, as with Newton’s clockwork universe, behind these machine
powered decision-making systems sit a group of “prime movers” who do
 not qualify as gods but as humans made of flesh and blood, be they Mark
Zuckerberg or Xi Jinping. This book is about a new cybernetic watch that
 purports to push aside its watchmaker(s) and whose first instantiation was
 the cryptocurrency, Bitcoin. Three decades after Fukuyama’s thesis,
 blockchain technologies are propelling a Cambrian explosion of new
 governance systems. Radically new governance concepts are being brought
 to the forefront: from distributed consensus to decentralized autonomous
 organizations (DAOs), with many others on the horizon.
 These radical new forms of governance do not emerge out of a vacuum
 but instead ride on a wave of sociotechnical imaginaries that interpret
 technological advancements in light of speculative science fiction and
 political visions. The idea of cyberspace—a virtual, open-ended matrix
 having its roots in arcade games—itself emerged in science fiction,
 famously being coined in William Gibson’s Neuromancer.13 In a similar
 vein, Neal Stephenson, in The Diamond Age, imagined that the information
 age would bring a kind of distributed republic or tribe, called a “phyle.”14
 Technology is abundant in this world, but the protocol produces artificial
 scarcity. People can opt in to phyles, which are run as peer-to-peer
 networks, depending on their affinity, such as religion or ideology. More
 recently, in Too Like the Lightning, the first book in the Terra Ignota series,
 Ada Palmer imagined the ruling powers of the future as “Hives.”‘15 In the
 series, these Hives enable voluntary citizenships, incorporating different
 languages, customs, and governance regimes, with new technologies
 fueling prosperity for some and surveillance and censorship for many
 others. These networked, distributed political communities are the early
 visions of “cloud communities,”16 an idea that is now fueling serious
 discussions about the future of global citizenship.
 Such visions, emerging from science fiction, suggest that a different
 world, with a different philosophy and a different politics, is possible.
 Whether this world is benign or evil remains an open question. Yet, there
 seems to be a movement visible in these sociotechnical imaginaries, one
 that resonates with the world we actually live in. First, there is the growing
 importance of technology. In the 1950s, people still imagined planetary
 civilization to be run quite similarly to their own places and times; we have
 moved to imaginaries of brain-chip-empowered hiveminds that coordinate
 economic activities through voluntary peer-to-peer networks. Second, there
 is a move away from what Palmer described as the “old spider,” the nation
state. 
Our political existence, we imagine, is deterritorializing,
 dematerializing, and moving into the boundless expanse of cyberspace. We
 are both everywhere and nowhere, but political power and physical bodies
 still persist, generating divisions between the haves and the have nots and
 reminding us of the temporality of our own existence. Third, as anticipated
 by Marshall McLuhan, we reach back into the distant past to understand our
 present and envision our possibilities for the future.17 Stephenson’s phyle
 was derived from the idea of a tribe in ancient Greece. To put it in the
 words of Palmer’s protagonist, “whether you are my contemporary still
 awed by the new order, or an historian gazing back at my Twenty-Fifth
 Century as remotely as I gaze back on the Eighteenth, you will find yourself
 more fluent in the language of the past than you imagined; we all are.”18 We
 need, as Carugati and Schneider put it, a new practice of “governance
 archeology.”19
 These three developments—the revolutionary role of technology, moving
 away from the nation state, and a revival of political ideas from the past—
 have fueled not only science fiction but also concrete developments in
 technology. Already in the 1970s, influential figures like Steward Brand
 used their imaginations to fuse drugs, advanced electronic networks, and
 ideals of living in primitive communities to fuel the vision that powered
 Silicon Valley and its Californian Ideology.20 Later, John Perry Barlow
 extended this vision to the digital world, when he imagined cyberspace (a
 term borrowed from science fiction) as a frictionless new world that would
 bring equality and abundance in the digital realm. For all the prowess of
 their speculations, old-fashioned human organizations still sat firmly behind
 the wheel of Brand’s and Barlow’s technological utopias until October 31,
 2008.
 On that day, the publication of the Bitcoin white paper established a new
 technological infrastructure—blockchain technology—through which
 people can interact and transact in a peer-to-peer manner. Blockchain
 technology is a new type of economic and political institution that works
 outside of the existing political fabric made up of trusted intermediaries,21
 be they either state agencies, corporations, or civil society organizations. It
 operates as a distributed processing network (or “world computer”) that is
 not owned or controlled by anyone and whose records are immutable.
 Initially created to realize the political vision of a small group of
visionaries, known as the “cypherpunks,” blockchain technology has, since
 its inception, moved in many new directions and today constitutes a new
 basis for transactions, rulemaking, and decision-making.
 Why Blockchain Governance?
 This book is about blockchain governance, which covers the regulation and
 governance of and by blockchain technology. It is concerned with a wide
 range of issues, from how policymakers may respond to challenges raised
 by blockchain, via how blockchain developers can grapple with tensions in
 protocol design, to how fundamental principles like immutability both
 enable and hinder governance alternatives. Blockchain governance captures
 the dual aspects of governance by the technology (on-chain governance)
 and governance of the technology (off-chain governance). The dynamic
 between these two aspects of blockchain governance is a major theme of
 this book and will reappear throughout the chapters—for instance, in
 exploring the tension between the concepts of trust and confidence in an
 ostensibly “trustless” network and in assessing the impact of exogenous and
 endogenous pressures in shaping perceptions about the legitimacy of
 blockchain governance.
 In the following chapters, we find ourselves in the footsteps of Aristotle,
 who in his time witnessed a proliferation of new forms of governance in the
 Greek city states: from tyrannies to aristocracies, oligarchies, and
 democracies. It is in this context that the disciplines of law and political
 science first emerged to reflect on the questions of governance: What
 should a government look like? What is the role of a citizen and of the
 state? How does political change occur? How can political communities
 improve a citizen’s happiness and well-being? How should citizens be
 encouraged to be just and virtuous? Now, blockchain communities around
 the world are experimenting with different consensus algorithms,
 innovative voting systems, dispute resolution systems, and community
 covenants that are meant to act like written constitutions. And similar
 questions of governance arise: Should blockchain communities adhere to
 the “rule of code” or allow human interference in the administration of the
 protocol? Should a blockchain governance system adhere to democratic
principles, or could it adopt a plutocratic form of governance? How should
 blockchain communities preserve the polycentric nature of public
 permissionless blockchain networks?
 Blockchain governance captures the dual aspects of governance
 by the technology (on-chain governance) and governance of the
 technology (off-chain governance).
 Answering these questions is not straightforward. As Vili Lehdonvirta
 argued in 2016, blockchain governance is inherently a “paradox.” He asked,
 Isn’t it the point of blockchain technologies to obviate the need for (human)
 governance? And if it is not, and (human) governance is needed, why is a
 blockchain required at all, if people are going to ultimately trust a third
 party?22 The experience of the subsequent years has revealed that as the
 crypto economy has gone through boom and bust cycles, the importance of
 governance in particular has only grown. Indeed, good and effective
 governance has been predicted to be an important competitive feature of
 blockchain systems.23
 Why is it important to investigate blockchain governance? First,
 blockchain technology has become a consequential force in the world. Back
 in 2010, Bitcoin was still unknown to most people, its nascent community
 celebrated when someone used the cryptocurrency to buy a pizza. Only one
 decade later, blockchain technology has disrupted virtually every sector. It
 has become a trillion-dollar industry, with millions of people around the
 world developing Web3 applications, investing in new crypto projects, or
 chatting about the latest crypto crisis with colleagues over coffee.
 Blockchain has become a topic discussed by heads of state, central bankers,
 and the CEOs of the world’s largest companies. This growing relevance of
 blockchain technology automatically raises concerns of governance.
 Blockchain developers have started asking questions about their
 relationship with regulators, while policymakers have started to explore
 new pathways to formulating effective regulations. To do this wisely, an
 understanding of blockchain governance, in terms of its promises and
 challenges, is indispensable.
 Second, blockchain is surrounded by significant legal and regulatory
 uncertainty. Even though states have started formulating policies and
regulations for blockchain technologies, several of these efforts are often
 plagued by both a lack of expertise and a lack of foresight. Blockchain
 technology confronts us with the Collingridge dilemma. On the one hand,
 as long as the technology is still emerging, its consequences will be
 uncertain and therefore difficult to control. For instance, The DAO attack in
 2016 (discussed in chapter 5) had significant impact but was unforeseen—
 and even unintelligible—for most policymakers. On the other hand, as soon
 as blockchain technology gets entrenched in established institutions or ways
 of life, its consequences might be predictable, but the technology will be
 hard to control or steer. Projects are currently underway that aim to make
 blockchain the underlying technology for the governance of social media,
 global supply chain management, and global identity registries. Whether
 these projects succeed remains to be seen, but if they do, their consequences
 will be widespread, and it will become increasingly difficult to address or
 revert them. An important way to deal with this legal uncertainty is to
 analyze the potential regulation and governance challenges through the lens
 of legal and political theory, which is what this book intends to do.
 Third, 
blockchain is increasingly challenging our conceptual
 understanding of law and regulation. It does so in different ways. To start, it
 challenges and extends the concerns raised by scholars of Internet
 governance, related to the adage that “code is law.” While most people and
 organizations operating on the Internet continue to be subject to state laws,
 blockchain adds a new dynamic by promoting the autonomy of code.
 Blockchain systems purport to generate their own legal reality that is
 independent of the will of human participants interacting through them—
 and can therefore not be instrumentalized by centralized authorities—which
 in this book is captured as the rule of code, by way of analogy to the “rule
 of law.” The rules enshrined in blockchain-based systems are such that they
 share certain features with state and nonstate constitutional law systems.
 Moreover, by operating transnationally, blockchain systems are, to some
 extent, detached from the sovereignty of particular nation-states. They thus
 bring to the forefront a challenge earlier identified by scholars in the fields
 of societal, global, and digital constitutionalism, namely that constitutional
 orders are not limited to the sovereignty of nation-states. Instead,
 transnational organizations, large platforms, and now also quasi
autonomous blockchain systems generate constitutional orders that are
simultaneously compatible and in tension with established laws and
 regulations (discussed in chapter 7).
 Fourth, because of their inherent characteristics, blockchain systems
 introduce new modes of governance that urge us to rethink established
 political concepts. Political philosophy has revolved around certain key
 questions concerning political authority and sovereignty (e.g., what is the
 basis of sovereign power?), legitimacy (e.g., why do citizens accept and
 obey a system of governance?), and democracy (e.g., what are good
 procedures for democratic decision-making, how are citizens represented by
 political bodies?). Blockchain governance adds new dynamics to each of
 these questions, thereby also challenging established political concepts.
 For instance, while in traditional organizations authority is ultimately
 vested in human decision makers, the authority of blockchain-based
 systems is vested in a (purportedly) immutable code-based protocol, which
 will execute as planned regardless of the intent of the parties involved.
 Besides, even where human governance is involved, the pseudonymity
 inherent in most blockchain networks precludes an important set of
 governance dynamics (including the “one person, one vote” principle in
 traditional 
democracies), ultimately favoring more plutocratic or
 meritocratic modes of governance. Legitimacy also increasingly acquires a
 crucial role in blockchain systems, not as a means to justify the coercive
 actions of a sovereign—as in more traditional centralized governance
 structures—but as a mechanism to ensure loyalty to a system that is
 ultimately driven by voluntary participation. Finally, to the extent that
 blockchain systems can be regarded as “polycentric” governance systems
 (i.e., systems characterized by multiple overlapping centers of decision
making under an overarching shared set of rules), new questions emerge
 concerning the appropriate scale(s) at which these networks should (or can)
 be governed—from the individual core developer, via the multinational
 cryptocurrency exchange, to the globe-spanning technical infrastructure of
 the network itself.
 For some scholars, corporate governance offers a more appropriate
 theoretical lenses with which to analyze blockchain systems than political
 governance, as these systems rely on “voluntary cooperation” (like
 corporations) and act “more like markets than hierarchies.”24 This is in
 contrast to the involuntary cooperation inherent in states, where the state’s
capacity to coerce makes political concepts of legitimacy and deliberation
 more important. From a corporate governance perspective, the potential
 failure of a contract or problem of trust between network participants (e.g.,
 from users to core developers) can be viewed as issues of bounded
 rationality, opportunism, or maladaptation (e.g., contractual arrangements
 no longer effective after real-world changes). Consequently, corporate
 governance mechanisms should be used to address these issues. Indeed, in
 our discussion on how blockchain systems can be more effectively
 regulated and governed, we do use concepts and measures drawn from
 corporate governance, such as “regulation via governance” achieved
 through the shaping of social norms and incentives (chapter 8).
 Yet, the lens of corporate governance alone is insufficient to understand
 the complexity of blockchain governance. First, the status of permissionless
 blockchains as a shared infrastructural technology—a common good—calls
 for insights from political science and political economy (e.g., commons
 management).25 Second, though there are certainly applications of
 blockchain technology that may draw lessons from theories of corporate
 governance, there are several that do not fit the corporate mold, with
 ambitions ranging from rewilding the planet to creating new states. In other
 words, these systems involve participants who have motivations other than
 that of the competitive homo economicus. Consequently, some scholars
 have called for the design of blockchain governance institutions that are not
 primarily economically oriented.26 Given this heterogeneity, concepts from
 political theory (and sociology) such as legitimacy, trust, and states of
 exception prove to be useful not only for understanding centralized,
 coercive political systems but also for shedding light on the distinct
 challenges and tensions faced by a wide range of decentralized, noncoercive
 blockchain-based systems. Third, many blockchain systems have
 intentionally embraced the language and practices of political governance—
 with participants engaging in group deliberation on forums, casting regular
 votes, drafting constitutions, and discussing concepts like legitimacy and
 alegality. This culture requires far more participatory involvement than that
 required of an individual shareholder of a typical public corporation.
 While some of these reasons for studying blockchain governance might
 seem abstract at first, this book will show, by means of examples, that they
 have real consequences. Our selection of examples is based on a desire to
illustrate the implications of different governance choices on the operations
 of blockchain systems with canonical cases, while also providing an
 account of more recent cases, which might eventually become landmark
 cases in the history of blockchain governance. For instance, the example of
 Steem (chapter 4) shows how a neglect of the role of trust in blockchain
 networks can lead to problematic centralized dynamics, including hostile
 takeovers. The DAO attack (chapter 5) illustrates how blockchain networks
 can suffer emergency crises, which might lead to violations of their core
 principles. The recent examples of Ooki DAO (chapter 3) and the Tornado
 Cash (chapter 6) show how even relatively simple blockchain applications
 can challenge the boundaries of legal systems, leading lawmakers to take
 drastic and sometimes draconian countermeasures. These concrete
 examples demonstrate the relevance of discussing blockchain governance in
 the light of legal and political theory, and hence the relevance of this book
 for blockchain developers, policymakers, and anyone with a general interest
 or stake in the technology.
 This Book
 Blockchain Governance places itself at the heart of a burgeoning global
 conversation between academics, developers, and policymakers. The book
 starts with an in-depth introduction to the technical aspects of blockchain
 and the particular governance forms it enables (chapter 2). From there, it
 embeds the discussion on blockchain governance within the broader context
 of Internet governance. It argues that blockchain technology has enabled a
 shift from the rule by code model of traditional Internet platforms to a new
 rule of code model, with particular implications for the interaction with
 traditional rule of law systems (chapter 3).
 The book then investigates a concept central to the political and legal
 visions of blockchain, its purportedly “trustless” character (chapter 4).
 Responding to sociological work on trust, it argues that blockchain
 technology could best be understood as a “confidence machine” even
 though the need for trust is not eliminated but rather dispersed within a
 distributed network of actors. Drawing from the historical event of The
 DAO attack, the book subsequently turns to the question of sovereignty in
blockchain systems (chapter 5). It argues that blockchain systems are
 organized as positivist legal orders and that, like the legal orders of nation
states, they are vulnerable to the states of exception that urge the emergence
 of sovereign decision-making.
 Subsequently, the book investigates two avenues to further develop and
 expand thinking about blockchain governance. The first avenue is centered
 around the concept of alegality taken from legal philosophy (chapter 6),
 which implies that legal orders have distinct boundaries that can be
 transgressed. The book argues that blockchain technology sometimes
 transgresses the boundaries of existing legal orders. Although regulators
 still have the means to address these transgressions in many cases (e.g.,
 through enforcement of existing law or amendments to the law), certain
 alegal acts put into question how a legal order draws the legal/illegal
 boundary. The second avenue addresses the pivotal political concept of
 “legitimacy” (chapter 7), which in recent years has also become a focal
 point in discussions about blockchain governance. The book lays out a
 comparative discourse, distinguishing between the concepts of social
 constitutionalism and digital constitutionalism and providing a new concept
 that has been referred to as “blockchain constitutionalism.” It discusses
 several understandings of legitimacy in this context, ranging from a thin
 understanding of “legitimacy as legality” to a thicker understanding of
 legitimacy as including substantive concerns, such as human rights and
 environmental justice.
 The book concludes by laying out possible futures for blockchain
 governance (chapter 8). In light of the potential fields of application of
 blockchain technology, it investigates possible legal or regulatory regimes
 that might be developed to support or suppress the technology as well as
 possible future configurations of blockchain governance. As it draws to a
 close, it is our hope that the book will have persuaded the reader to think
 about the ways in which legal and political theory on the one hand, and
 blockchain governance on the other, can enrich one another. This might turn
 out to be of great importance, once the speculative blockchain hype dies out
 and the technology becomes part of the infrastructure of our everyday lives
 and politics.
 OceanofPDF.com
2
 Blockchain
 A specter is haunting the modern world, the specter of crypto-anarchy.
 —Timothy May, Crypto-Anarchist Manifesto1
 Cash for Eternity
 “Who wants to live forever?” Queen’s evocative song echoes through the
 centuries, for humans have always been obsessed with the prospect of
 immortality. Yet, the means at our disposal to achieve immortality have
 changed over time. In ancient civilizations, immortality could only be
 achieved by performing great deeds that would be remembered throughout
 history. This is the case, for instance, with Tutankhamun, Alexander the
 Great, and Qin Shi Huang, whose lives endure in the history books of
 modern societies. But this type of immortality does not satisfy everyone.
 Like the medieval alchemists, humans have long been searching for another
 form of immortality, more closely related to biological life. This type of
 immortality is not about being forever remembered but rather about
 extending biological life.
 Hannah Arendt argued that our understanding of time and history is
 intimately connected with our scientific understanding of the universe: an
 immeasurable expanse of moving particles, indifferent to human affairs.2
 Today, we understand that entropy is a core feature of the universe, which
 constantly pushes toward diffusion and disorder. Yet, there is also “extropy”
 in the universe: forces that tend toward fusion and order. Life is the most
 eminent of these forces.
 Hal Finney, an influential American software developer and
 cryptographer, pondered upon the prospects of immortality: “If you accept
 that it is possible in principle for medicine to give us an unlimited healthy
 lifespan, then all you really need to do is to live in a universe where that
 medical technology is discovered, and then avoid accidents.”3
Finney described the “self” as a lucky arrangement of billions of atoms in
 the brain. Hence, according to him, immortality simply requires preserving
 the brain’s hardwiring. In 2009, Finney was diagnosed with a deadly
 disease: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Confronted with his imminent
 death in 2014, he underwent a medical procedure where his body was
 cryogenized at a low temperature to ensure preservation of the tissues. His
 hope was that if one day the tissues’ physical conditions could be solved by
 medical science, they would be awakened so that they can continue living.
 Finney was part of the extropian movement,4 popularized in the 1980s by
 the philosopher Max More—an early advocate for cryogenics. In 1990,
 More published the “Extropian Principles”5 to help people understand how
 technological advances could liberate humanity from its physiological
 limits, opening up new opportunities for never-ending progress. The
 subsequent publication of Extropy: The Journal of Transhumanist Thought
 brought together a small group of future-minded scientists, researchers, and
 engineers interested in exploring the use of new technologies, such as
 artificial intelligence (AI), robotics, nanotechnology, space exploration, and
 life extension, to “upgrade” humanity.
 While cryogenics purported to preserve individual lives, extropians were
 also interested in sustaining a certain form of collective life. They believed
 that technological progress and innovation could only flourish in a free
 market environment, liberated from hierarchic control. As claimed by More,
 “societies with pervasive and coercively enforced centralized control cannot
 allow dissent and diversity,” as “no group of experts can understand and
 control the endless complexity of an economy and society composed of
 other individuals like themselves.”6 Extropians regard governmental
 regulations as obstacles to the freedom to innovate, and taxes as a distortion
 of the free market’s ability to effectively allocate resources. The saying goes
 that death and taxes are the two things you can’t escape, yet that is precisely
 what the extropians were trying to do. To escape taxes requires moving
 away from governments and politics, indulging in experiments of
 “libertarian exit”7 that might require moving into new territories—on earth
 or in space settlements.8 To escape from death requires creating things that
 can persist for eternity, both in the physical and digital world, without the
 need for anyone to look after them. The development of a global and
decentralized digital currency—the extropians believed—was key to
 achieving these goals.
 These ideas were shared with an adjacent and somewhat overlapping
 movement: the cypherpunks—a loose group of anarchists, libertarians,
 cryptographers, and software developers interested in exploring the use of
 cryptography to protect individual privacy and online liberties. Like the
 extropians, the cypherpunks were fiercely antigovernment and regarded
 centralized institutions as the source of all worldly corruption. The
 prominent cypherpunk Timothy C. May wrote in the Crypto-Anarchist
 Manifesto, back in 1989:
 The saying goes that death and taxes are the two things you can’t
 escape, yet that is precisely what the extropians were trying to do.
 A specter is haunting the modern world, the specter of crypto anarchy.
 Computer technology is on the verge of providing the ability for
 individuals and groups to communicate and interact with each other in
 a totally anonymous manner. Two persons may exchange messages,
 conduct business, and negotiate electronic contracts without ever
 knowing the true name, or legal identity, of the other. . . . Just as the
 technology of printing altered and reduced the power of medieval
 guilds and the social power structure, so too will cryptologic methods
 fundamentally alter the nature of corporations and of government
 interference in economic transactions.9
 Thus, while the extropians looked for ways to extend life, the cypherpunks
 focused on letting go of governmental institutions or any other corruptible
 intermediary authority. Despite their different ambitions, both groups were
 concerned with improving individual and collective autonomy. What they
 had in common was the need for a shared record of accounts, an
 uncensorable, immutable, and immortal digital currency not controlled by
 any single individual or group and that could persist for generations,
 independently of any single institutional framework.10
Digital Cash
 One of the first attempts at creating anonymous digital cash can be traced
 back to David Chaum, one of the most influential members of the
 cypherpunk movement. Chaum’s doctoral dissertation explored the use of
 cryptography to create trusted networks of untrusted nodes. In 1989, he
 attempted to operationalize his theoretical insights through the development
 of a new digital currency system—which he called DigiCash—using
 cryptographic techniques to allow for anonymous and untraceable
 transactions. DigiCash came with many significant benefits for users
 interested in financial privacy and merchants interested in a secure way to
 engage in commercial transactions online. However, as opposed to today’s
 cryptocurrencies, DigiCash required a central authority to act as a trusted
 intermediary for all electronic transactions. Chaum managed to enter into
 commercial partnerships with a few banks, but DigiCash failed to gain
 greater traction.
 DigiCash enabled users to anonymously withdraw digital notes from
 their bank so that they could subsequently be exchanged off market, or
 directly send payments of any value to third parties. The project gained
 attention among the cypherpunk community, but governments and
 merchants were concerned about the anonymity it provided. Many banks
 saw it as a competitive product rather than as an opportunity to improve
 their services to their clients, and most consumers simply did not
 understand the need for digitally mediated transactions. As the project failed
 to gain more mainstream adoption, Chaum’s company went bankrupt in
 1998.
 The cypherpunks were undeterred by this setback. Other attempts were
 made at creating decentralized digital cash. Wei Dai and Nick Szabo
 proposed alternative implementations of digital currencies (known as b
money and BitGold, respectively) using proof of computation (proof of
 work, PoW) to secure the issuance of new currency. Yet, both approaches
 suffered from the double-spending problem, enabling users to fool the
 network to spend the same money twice. Building upon these initial
 developments, in 2004, Hal Finney created an anonymous currency called
 RPOW, where users could only be identified through their cryptographic
 keys. However, like Chaum’s DigiCash, RPOW also relied on a centralized
 system in charge of ensuring that no one could spend more money than they
actually have. As such, it failed to fulfill the requirement of being
 completely autonomous and independent from any central authority.
 While the cypherpunks were still working on the design of secure and
 anonymous digital cash, the world went through a period of great turmoil.
 The global financial system had expanded the range of new financial
 products, like collateralized debt obligations, whose collaterals had become
 increasingly risky. The whole edifice of globalized finance came tumbling
 down on September 15, 2008, when the large American investment bank
 Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy. This triggered a series of bailouts, as
 governments decided to inject billions of dollars of public money to prevent
 the collapse of the global financial system. This reinforced the convictions
 of the extropians and cypherpunks: centralized powers—be they banks or
 governments—could and should not be trusted. The cypherpunk revolution
 was about to be unleashed.
 On October 31, 2008, Finney’s attention was drawn to an email sent to
 the cypherpunk mailing list, by an anonymous contributor known as Satoshi
 Nakamoto. “I’ve been working on a new electronic cash system that’s fully
 peer-to-peer, with no trusted third party,” Nakamoto wrote, with a reference
 to a paper titled “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System.”11 In this
 paper, Nakamoto outlined the specification for a new digital currency that
 would be powered by a network of computers rather than by a central
 authority. This system, which he called Bitcoin, leveraged previous work
 done by cryptographers and computer scientists like the aforementioned
 cypherpunks as well as Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard Adleman
 (RSA public-key cryptography), Hans Peter Luhn (hash functions), and
 Ralph Merkle (Merkle trees).
 Bitcoin also built upon the work of physicist Scott Stornetta and
 cryptographer Stuart Haber, who—already in the 1990s—had devised a
 system relying on a network of dispersed but interconnected copies of a
 shared ledger in order to solve the problem of time stamping and
 authenticity in the digital realm. Their solution was to record data into a
 series of time-stamped digital “blocks,” each referencing the “hash” (i.e.,
 the digital digest) of the previous block so that altering information in one
 block would require altering all the blocks connected afterwards. They
 called this technology a “blockchain”—and they went on to create the first
 blockchain that ever existed.
Nakamoto combined all these primitives together with advanced peer-to
peer technologies, cryptography, and game theoretical incentives to
 generate a decentralized, secure, verifiable, and immutable ledger for
 financial transactions.12
 A few months after Nakamoto’s email, the ideas described within his
 white paper had been translated into software. Nakamoto launched the
 Bitcoin network on January 3, 2009, with the creation of the first genesis
 block, which generated the first set of Bitcoins allocated to Nakamato’s
 address. Embedded within the first block was the headline of an article from
 The Times newspaper: “Chancellor on brink of second bailout for banks”—
 a message revealing the motivations behind the creation of Bitcoin while
 also providing proof regarding the network’s launch date.
 Today, Finney is known as the person who received the first Bitcoin
 transaction, on January 12, 2009. Perhaps more than anyone else, he
 immediately saw the great promise of Nakamoto’s invention.
 Over the years, Bitcoin gained increased popularity, and—despite its
 volatility—by 2011 there were already a few businesses accepting Bitcoin
 as a form of payment as well as a few organizations, like Wikileaks,
 accepting donations in Bitcoin. This is also the year in which Nakamoto
 retired from the Bitcoin project, and the community has since been led by a
 small number of core developers. With its ability to provide a global,
 decentralized, and censorship-resistant monetary system that operates
 outside of any governmental control, Bitcoin is an important step toward
 realizing the vision of both the cypherpunks and the extropians. Nakamoto’s
 association with these groups suggests that they may have influenced the
 creation of Bitcoin. At the same time, while Nakamoto was an early adopter
 and supporter of both movements, there is no evidence that Satoshi is still
 active in either community.
 The Technology
 By cleverly combining existing innovations, Nakamoto’s Bitcoin solved
 three problems all at once. First, it eliminated the need for a centralized
 issuing authority (the mint) by introducing a protocol of decentralized
 money issuance based on individual contributions to a peer-to-peer network
(figure 1). Second, it solved the need of having a centralized authority to
 address the double-spending problem by means of a decentralized ledger
 with a guaranteed, tamper-resistant, and shared history of time-stamped
 transactions. Third, it solved the security problem by means of an
 incentivization system (PoW) that automatically increases the security of
 the network as the network’s value increases. Simply put, Bitcoin combines
 the functionalities of a mint, a bank, and a currency in one decentralized
 network.
 Figure 1 Client server architecture and peer-to-peer architecture.
 Bitcoin’s decentralized ledger comes with specific features that enable
 the establishment of a shared history between all network nodes. The
 problem in most peer-to-peer networks is that there is no agreed-upon
 notion of time, making it impossible for network participants to agree upon
 the order of messages they receive. To avoid double spending, where the
 same transaction is sent to two different users at the same time, Bitcoin
 introduces a mechanism to collectively keep track of the order of
 transactions by linking blocks one after the other. Every block of
 transactions is uniquely identified through its cryptographic hash (i.e., a
 digital fingerprint unique to that block)13 and includes a reference to the
 hash of the previous block. This creates a long chain of blocks that
 chronologically reference each other, where the hash of every block is
 incorporated in the following block (figure 2).
Figure 2 Diagram of a blockchain.
 The content of the Bitcoin blockchain can only be updated in an append
only manner, by adding information to it, but it cannot be retroactively
 altered or modified, at least in theory. The combination of cryptographic
 hashes and Merkle trees, along with other cryptographic primitives such as
 public-private key cryptography and digital signatures, makes it virtually
 impossible for anyone to tamper with the data recorded on the Bitcoin
 blockchain. If a malicious user were to try and modify the content of a
 Bitcoin transaction, this would invalidate the digital signature associated
 with such a transaction, which will therefore be rejected by the network.
 Moreover, even if the user could recreate a valid digital signature (by
 controlling the corresponding private key), modifying any transactions in a
 block would necessarily require recalculating the hash of the block in which
 the transaction has been stored—and therefore also the hash of all the
 following blocks in the chain, whose reference to the previous block would
 otherwise be broken. This makes blockchain-based applications particularly
 well suited for applications where data integrity is of paramount
 importance, such as in the case of financial transactions.
 In practice, however, a malicious user could still modify a blockchain’s
 history by recalculating the hashes of all the following blocks in the chain.
 While the exercise might be tedious, it could be potentially achieved with a
 limited amount of computational power. In Bitcoin, this problem is solved
 by means of the PoW algorithm. Nakamoto introduced a particular
 implementation of PoW, in which network participants compete to solve a
 cryptographic puzzle, whose difficulty is adjusted based on the amount of
 computational resources currently engaged in the network. Solving that
puzzle is a precondition for anyone to be able to submit a new block to the
 network.
 Hence, even though all network participants are responsible for verifying
 and validating transactions, only some of these participants—called miners
 —are also responsible for creating blocks of transactions (figure 3) that will
 be added to the Bitcoin blockchain. In order to propose a new block to the
 network, miners need to find the solution to a mathematical puzzle that
 requires an increasing amount of computational power, as the number of
 miners increases. The puzzle consists in finding a particular “nonce” to
 insert in the header of a block, in order to ensure that the resulting hash for
 that block is sufficiently small. The difficulty of this puzzle is determined
 by the Bitcoin protocol and evolves over time in order to ensure that a new
 block is added, on average, every ten minutes. If blocks are created too fast,
 the Bitcoin protocol will increase the difficulty of the puzzle; vice versa, if
 blocks take too long to be created, the Bitcoin protocol will automatically
 decrease the difficulty. Miners engage in this computational effort because
 the first one to solve the mathematical puzzle, and therefore to create a new
 block, is rewarded with a specified amount of Bitcoin (the block reward), as
 well as the transaction fees for all transactions included into the block, as a
 compensation for their efforts. This creates a race among miners, who are
 economically incentivized to expend significant amounts of computational
 power in order to be the first to find a new block.
Figure 3 Diagram of a block of transactions.
 As a consequence of these features, blockchain systems are described as
 being technically distributed across numerous nodes instead of centralized
 in servers controlled by a single operator. As all transactions are replicated
 and distributed across the network participants, there is no single point of
 failure, and consequently the network is resilient against attacks and
 censorship. Instead of an operator being able to unilaterally change software
 without the authorization of users, blockchain networks are noncoercive as
 participants must actively accept any proposed changes and can decide to
 fork a protocol rather than accept changes. Relatedly, as network nodes
 verify and validate all transactions submitted to the network, the existence
 of transactions is transparent and traceable. At the same time, despite this
 transparency of transactions, participants can engage with a network
 without using their real-world identities. In other words, these networks
 allow for pseudonymous participation.
 Bitcoin is a new form of digital cash whose “production and transaction
 is constrained by expenditure” of computational energy.14 PoW blockchains
 like Bitcoin are today heavily criticized for requiring significant electricity
 consumption for their operations.15 This resource-intensive design is
charged with contributing to global heating. Alternative consensus
 mechanisms have emerged over time, such as proof of stake (PoS), which
 greatly reduce the amount of computational resources expended in the
 block production process. In a PoS system, network participants are
 selected to add a new block to the blockchain based on the number of coins
 they have staked. This means that competition between validating nodes is
 no longer based on the amount of computational power invested into the
 network. Similarly, rewards for participation are not based on the amount of
 computation that each node has put in the network but rather on the relative
 share of tokens they have staked. Conversely, if these participants fail to
 maintain the blockchain, their stakes can be slashed. The Ethereum
 blockchain transitioned from PoW consensus to a PoS system to drastically
 reduce energy consumption, among other things.16
 Finally, while Bitcoin is decentralized at the infrastructural level, it is not
 necessarily so at the operational level since it is difficult to know who
 ultimately controls the nodes in the network. Yet, the degree of
 decentralization of a blockchain network is crucial to its overall security
 and sustainability. Both PoW and PoS blockchains are vulnerable to the so
called 51 percent attack, where an attack to the network can be executed by
 a single entity controlling over 50 percent of the computational power (in
 the case of PoW) or over 50 percent of the overall stake in the network (in
 the case of PoS).
 The rise of Bitcoin spurred the emergence of other blockchain-based
 networks like LiteCoin (2011), NameCoin (2011), and, most notably,
 Ethereum (2014)—the brainchild of Vitalik Buterin. As the teenager editor
 of 
Bitcoin Magazine, one of the first publications dedicated to
 cryptocurrency and blockchain technology, Buterin realized that blockchain
 technology could be used not only as a ledger for cryptocurrency
 transactions but also as a means to deploy software code that could be used
 to automate these transactions. This opened up the possibility for any type
 of decentralized applications (DApps), even ones that could manage entire
 organizations of people.17 The idea soon turned into a visionary project,
 which eventually became Ethereum.
 Buterin designed Ethereum as the underlying infrastructure for a “world
 computer,” where anyone could deploy code that could be used to power
 many different types of DApps. The particularity of Ethereum is that it
features a built-in Turing-complete programming language allowing for
 code to be executed, in a distributed manner, by all nodes on the Ethereum
 blockchain.18 As such, the Ethereum blockchain allows for the distributed
 execution of software code with a guarantee of execution of said code.
 Anyone can interact with these so-called smart contracts through a
 blockchain transaction that includes a series of “input” parameters. These
 parameters are processed by the smart contract’s code according to a set of
 predefined conditions, generating an “output” that can trigger another
 transaction and ultimately alter the state of the blockchain.19 Because every
 node in the network must obtain the exact same result from the smart
 contract’s computation, smart contracts are always deterministic, meaning
 they can only execute in one specific manner, without the possibility of
 interference from a third party. Thus, once a smart contract is deployed on
 the Ethereum blockchain, its execution is guaranteed.
 Ethereum’s core idea is the closest implementation of what cypherpunk
 Nick Szabo had originally characterized as a “smart contract.”20 Smart
 contracts are not legal contracts in and of themselves, yet they enable
 people to enter into technologically driven contractual agreements with
 other people or machines. A large number of smart contracts exist on
 Ethereum today, allowing for a wide variety of applications to be carried
 out without the intervention of a centralized operator, such as executing
 payments or automating transactions, creating escrow accounts, or even
 creating decentralized finance (DeFi) platforms that are not operated by
 anyone but their own code. Most importantly for the purposes of this book,
 smart contracts can be leveraged to create so-called DAOs, allowing for
 people to pool resources together into a common treasury and collectively
 manage this treasury through a set of governance and decision-making
 procedures that have been enshrined into code and are therefore
 automatically enforced by the technological infrastructure of the underlying
 blockchain.
 Ethereum first extended the functionality of Bitcoin beyond the
 cryptocurrency use case, and now many other blockchains have followed
 suit—including Hyperledger, Tezos, and Solana. Most of these blockchain
 systems, which are central to this book, are so-called public, permissionless
 blockchains. A public, permissionless blockchain is a decentralized,
 distributed ledger that is open to anyone. Public blockchains generally
operate with pseudonymous identities, giving users means to preserve their
 (financial) privacy online. In contrast, so-called private blockchains are
 permissioned ledgers that are only accessible to approved participants.
 Participants are required to identify themselves in order to access and
 interact with private ledgers. The latter are generally adopted by large
 enterprises developing internal blockchain solutions to automate certain
 business processes. Enterprise blockchains are also being developed by
 consortia of companies in a wide range of industries, including finance,
 health care, supply chain management, and energy. Because most of the
 governance innovations are occurring in the context of public blockchains,
 this book focuses on them over private or enterprise blockchain systems.
 Tools for Governance
 Since the advent of Bitcoin, blockchain technology has been developed and
 used for a variety of applications beyond cryptocurrencies. While initially
 geared toward the creation of digital scarcity, blockchain technology has
 become a new institutional technology21 that facilitates the recording of
 information for authentication and verification purposes, the automation of
 operations through the use of smart contracts and DApps, and the creation
 of new organizational structures.22 It thus becomes clear why blockchain
 technology is often associated with the theme of governance, considering its
 potential role in the creation and distribution of scarce (digital) resources,
 the issuance of authoritative claims or attestations (e.g., property
 certificates), the execution of automated contracts, and the provision of new
 decision-making mechanisms.
 Digital Scarcity
 Blockchains enable the exchange of various digital assets in a peer-to-peer
 fashion. While people have been distributing digital files over peer-to-peer
 networks like BitTorrent for many years now, distributing digital files over
 the Internet network always and necessarily implies a reproduction of these
 files: if I send you a digital song over the Internet, I still retain my digital
 copy of the song. This is what has led economists to qualify the digital
realm as nonrival, meaning that consumption of a digital file by one person
 does not preclude the consumption of the same digital file by another
 person. The technological guarantees of blockchain technology make it
 impossible for any given actor to reproduce blockchain-based digital assets.
 We can now talk about “digital scarcity” (as opposed to the “artificial
 scarcity” introduced by intellectual property) regarding all digital assets that
 subsist on a blockchain.23
 These digital assets can assume a variety of functions. Cryptocurrencies,
 like Bitcoin or Ethereum, are necessary for the use of the underlying
 blockchain network. Bitcoins are needed to pay the transaction fees to use
 the Bitcoin network, and Ether is needed to pay for the cost of executing
 transactions on the Ethereum blockchain. These cryptocurrencies can also
 be traded for other cryptocurrencies or traditional fiat currencies on
 specialized exchanges. Exchanges can be either centralized, like Coinbase
 or Kraken, or decentralized, like Uniswap or Sushiswap.24
 Blockchain tokens are another type of digital assets issued on a
 blockchain that represent a specific resource or utility. Today, there are a
 variety of different blockchain platforms used for the issuance of digital
 tokens. The most well-known is probably Ethereum, which supports the
 issuance and exchange of a wide variety of token-based digital assets. Most
 blockchain tokens provide the ability to access a certain service or use a
 certain blockchain application: these are usually referred to as utility
 tokens.25
 Sometimes, tokens represent fractional ownership in a project or asset
 that has been tokenized on a blockchain. These are called security tokens
 and often resemble more traditional investments, like equity or debt.
 Oftentimes, these tokens are offered to the public by the means of token
 sales, also known as initial coin offerings (ICOs), used to raise funds to
 develop a particular blockchain-based initiative. Whether they refer to
 shares in a company or in a blockchain-based entity, the sale of these tokens
 is commonly assimilated to an investment contract, where the purchasers
 expect some financial return on their investment through the efforts of
 others. As a result, the issuance and trading of these tokens are generally
 highly regulated because they typically fall within the scope of securities
 regulations.
Some blockchain tokens are also associated with the possibility to
 participate in the governance of a particular blockchain system. By
 acquiring a token, one thus automatically acquires the possibility to cast a
 vote regarding a particular issue—and the more tokens one holds, the more
 influence one has in the decision-making process. Thus, as opposed to the
 democratic principle of “one person, one vote,” blockchain systems
 typically implement a plutocratic governance system based on “one token,
 one vote,” more akin to shareholder voting. This essentially means that
 those with more economic power have the possibility of swaying the
 decision-making process to their own advantage by purchasing more
 tokens. A variety of solutions have been elaborated to mitigate this problem.
 For instance, quadratic voting26 allows people to express the intensity of
 their preferences by casting multiple votes on a single issue, with votes
 being discounted by a quadratic formula. As such, it provides individuals
 with a more granular means of expressing their preferences, granting more
 weight to deeply held convictions while nonetheless ensuring a fair
 representation of the opinion of the masses. In addition, as a complement or
 as an alternative to these forms of token-based voting, a variety of
 reputation-based governance systems have progressively been built and
 adopted by several blockchain systems,27 relying on nontransferable tokens
 to implement more meritocratic governance systems.
 Tokens can also be used to represent certificates of ownerships for
 physical assets (e.g., gold) or digital assets (e.g., works of art). The latter are
 usually referred to as NFTs (nonfungible tokens). NFTs are a type of digital
 asset that are unique and nonfungible (meaning they cannot be replaced by
 another identical asset) as they each have their own distinct value. For the
 first time in history, artists have the ability to monetize their digital artworks
 without having to transfer the copyright in these works, for what they are
 selling is not the intellectual property associated with the work but rather
 unique digital copies of that work. One of the most well-known NFTs is
 Beeple’s “Everydays: The First 5,000 Days,” which was sold for USD 69
 million at a Christie’s auction in March 2021. Following that sale, the NFT
 market has seen a boom in both the number of NFTs being created and the
 prices being paid for them. The digital scarcity inherent in these tokens has
 resulted in significant speculative dynamics in the NFT market, leading to
 an overall market capitalization of over USD 20 billion in 2022. And even
though the speculative bubble has eventually burst, NFTs remain today a
 powerful means for the trading of (scarce) digital assets.
 NFTs are also increasingly used to create new types of virtual
 communities, whose membership is defined by the ownership of NFTs from
 a particular collection. The Bored Ape Yacht Club is perhaps the most
 representative example of this trend. This NFT collection of 10,000 Bored
 Apes has become one of the most expensive and influential NFT projects
 due to its focus on community benefits. Every Bored Ape NFT is not only
 an expensive collectible but also a community pass, enabling token holders
 to access exclusive community meetups all over the world and hang out
 with other Bored Apes. As such, NFTs are also being turned into a
 governance tool, with the advent of token-gated communities or forums,
 where ownership of an NFT becomes a precondition to access a particular
 type of community’s resources or even to engage with the governance of
 such a community.
 Authentication
 Blockchain technology provides new ways to verify and authenticate
 content as well as to gain secure and verifiable attestations or certifications.
 Instead of a digital notary service, with a blockchain, the authenticity of
 digital documents can be verified by simply consulting the information
 recorded on the chain. This functionality has been used already for a variety
 of applications, including the issuance of university diplomas and birth
 certificates.
 Indeed, while data recorded on a blockchain will remain forever
 accessible to all (at least as long as the blockchain network remains
 operative), it is also possible to record information on a blockchain through
 the use of hashes. This digital fingerprint constitutes an incorruptible proof
 that the file existed at that point in time in which the hash has been recorded
 on the blockchain and that the person initiating the transaction was most
 likely in possession of that file. The benefit of this approach is that no one
 accessing the blockchain will ever be able to retrieve the content of the
 information associated with the hash. Yet, anyone possessing the original
 file will be able to verify ex post that the file is authentic and its content has
 not been tampered with.
More recently, new modalities of certification or attestations have been
 brought forward in the blockchain space through the popularization of
 nontransferable tokens. These tokens are issued to a particular account by a
 recognized entity or peer in order to certify that the account holder fulfills
 specific requirements—whether such a system is used by a governmental
 authority to attest that someone is a US citizen or by a community member
 to declare that someone is a recognized member of a particular community.
 Because these tokens are nontransferable, they can be used to ensure that
 the account holder does indeed exhibit the relevant attributes or
 characteristics associated with those tokens. This opens a new window of
 opportunities for governance experimentation in blockchain-based systems
 that are not bound to a plutocratic tendency (where people can purchase
 tokens to acquire more voting power) but rather to a meritocratic tendency
 (where people have to earn tokens based on their attributes or skills, or
 according to their contributions to a particular initiative).
 Ensuring the reliability and trustworthiness of blockchain-based
 attestations and certifications is not devoid of any challenges. While the
 blockchain eliminates the possibility of forging a certificate or tampering
 with a previously issued credential, it does not as such guarantee the
 accuracy of the information stored within—also known as the problem of
 garbage in, garbage out. To the extent that they relate to information off
chain, for these blockchain-based credentials to be recognized as legitimate,
 they must demonstrate a rigorous verification and validation process,
 ideally undertaken by a trusted actor. Trusted actors who act as
 intermediaries between the on- and off-chain world are usually referred to
 as oracles, recording real-world information into the blockchain so that
 such information becomes available to smart contracts and other
 blockchain-based applications to act upon. The more real-world information
 a blockchain system needs, the greater the influence of oracles in ensuring
 the proper operations of that system. Therefore, it is increasingly more
 important to ensure that these oracles provide accurate and reliable data.28
 Decision-Making
 The most advanced blockchains that support the deployment of smart
 contracts also make it possible to create more sophisticated technological
arrangements, using software code to ensure that specific transactions are
 automatically executed whenever specific conditions are met. The
 traditional way to think about smart contracts is by analogy with a vending
 machine.29 The analogy is useful in showing that a technological
 infrastructure (i.e., the vending machine) can guarantee that a particular
 contract (with the vendor) will be fulfilled as intended, with no possibility
 of breach—unless one were to tamper with the vending machine. Hence,
 this interaction requires no trust among the contracting parties: the vending
 machine has no choice but to deliver the goods upon receiving the money.
 Yet, the analogy falters because unlike a vending machine that can easily be
 destroyed or tampered with (if the amount in the machine is greater than the
 cost of breaking it), the technological guarantees of blockchain technology
 make it virtually impossible to stop or influence the execution of a smart
 contract, unless the code specifically provides for it.30
 The programmability of blockchains and associated smart contracts
 enabled the creation of so-called DApps, which are pieces of software
 running on a blockchain that anyone can transact with. The use of DApps
 has also been proposed, more explicitly, as a way to create new
 organizational structures enabling people to coordinate themselves through
 a set of self-executing rules deployed on a blockchain. These are usually
 referred to as DAOs.31 Despite the name, a DAO is not fully autonomous.
 Rather, a DAO is an organization that is collectively managed by a
 community of members through a set of technical rules encoded in a smart
 contract, with no need for any centralized authority or administrative
 board.32 Accordingly, DAOs allow for the experimentation and
 implementation of more distributed and bottom-up governance systems.
 Indeed, because they have no management structure or CEO, DAOs
 necessarily require the intervention of their members to interact with their
 smart contracts to implement decision-making rules.
 There are many types of DAOs, which can fulfill different functions:
 from the management of a common treasury among people who do not
 necessarily know or trust each other, to operating a crowdfunding or
 investment platform where contributors are granted with a governance right
 over the project they contributed to, to administering an organization of
 people with a codified decision-making apparatus and a more decentralized
 governance structure.33
There are now several successful DAOs: Moloch DAO, for decentralized
 investments in blockchain infrastructure; Decentraland DAO, operating a
 decentralized planning committee in the metaverse; Mirror DAO, running
 the curation for a decentralized blogging platform; Lex DAO, gathering a
 group of legally minded engineers providing services for other DAOs; and
 the Friends with Benefits DAO, operating a members-only social club for
 crypto enthusiasts. There are even a few projects that see DAOs as an
 opportunity to create new self-sovereign structures that could effectively
 bypass or replace nation-states, thereby creating new “blockchain-based
 virtual nations”34 or “network states.”35 These communities of kinship
 leverage blockchain technology to self-organize through their own
 cryptocurrency, blockchain-based census system, and technologically
 driven governance structure, based on the principles of voluntary
 association.
 * * *
 After having outlined the development of blockchain technology as it
 evolved from a platform for digital cash to a more general purpose
 technology, chapter 2 has shown how its distinctive features—such as
 decentralization, immutability, pseudonymity, and verifiability—have
 enabled the emergence of new DApps with their own governance models,
 culminating in the advent of DAOs: decentralized organizations that operate
 in a distributed manner through collective governance. These emergent
 technologies present both challenges and opportunities in the field of
 governance. On the one hand, they offer the promise of enhanced
 transparency, trust, and efficiency in various sectors, from finance to supply
 chain management. On the other hand, they introduce novel complexities
 related to legal frameworks, security vulnerabilities, and decision-making
 processes that require careful examination and innovative solutions. In the
 chapters that follow, we delve deeper into the multifaceted landscape of
 blockchain-based governance, exploring the intricacies, successes, and
 ongoing debates in this rapidly evolving field.
 OceanofPDF.com
3
 Rule of Code
 On behalf of the future, I ask you of the past to leave us alone. You are not welcome
 among us. You have no sovereignty where we gather.
 —John Perry Barlow, Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace1
 Runaround
 On a distant planet, in a faraway corner of the galaxy, a lone robot is
 laboring away in an environment that is lethal for humans. Its mission is to
 collect a rare mineral, selenium, which is crucial for the sustenance of the
 operations on the planet. Speedy, like many other robots of its kind, has
 been programmed to abide by the Three Laws of Robotics. These laws
 stipulate that a robot (1) may not injure a human being, (2) must obey
 orders given by human beings except where such orders would conflict with
 the first law, and (3) must protect its own existence as long as such
 protection does not conflict with the first or second laws.
 In Asimov’s I, Robot stories, these three laws are intended as a safety
 measure to prevent robots from harming humans. Yet, as the story
 illustrates, although they are apparently consistent, these three laws could,
 in some rare circumstances, lead to unexpected and seemingly incoherent
 behaviors. Indeed, as Speedy realizes that the source of selenium can cause
 harm to its electromechanical structure (thus threatening its own existence),
 and that preservation of its electromechanical structure is a requirement to
 fulfill its mission (thus obeying human orders), Speedy gets stuck in a
 circular logic loop and begins to act erratically, ultimately endangering the
 mission and the humans involved.
 Written in 1941, Speedy’s story highlights the potential dangers of
 relying too heavily on AI without fully understanding how it works or being
 able to fully predict its behavior. Most importantly, it illustrates how—
 regardless of the robot’s actual intentions—any attempt at regulating AI
systems with human laws will always lead to confusion due to the inherent
 ambiguity and flexibility of natural language.
 When combined with a blockchain-based infrastructure, these challenges
 become even more problematic. Even if they do not come with
 sophisticated AI (yet), blockchain-based systems have already been
 deployed, operating autonomously on a distributed ledger, independently of
 any centralized authority. By virtue of their technical characteristics, these
 systems can be created in such a way that no one has the power to shut
 them down (i.e., there is no kill switch). They will continue to operate as
 long as there are enough nodes maintaining the underlying blockchain on
 which they run. As we will see later in the chapter, some of these systems
 have already proven to be capable of harm, most notably financial harm,
 money laundering, and terrorism financing.
 While it may be difficult to codify the laws of robotics into blockchain
 systems, which are incapable of comprehending human language, the
 alternative is to codify human laws into the strict and formal language of
 code. Yet, what computer code provides in terms of accuracy and precision,
 it loses in terms of flexibility and granularity. As such, it cannot adequately
 capture the nuances of human values, ethical principles, and morality that
 can only be expressed in natural language. Hence the paradox arises: on the
 one hand, blockchain-based systems cannot be expected to abide by the rule
 of law, which is formulated as general principles rather than specific
 instructions codified into code; on the other hand, any attempt at codifying
 Asimov’s laws into the rule of code, with specific instructions based on if
then conditionals, will necessarily reduce them to a form that is too
 simplistic to be sufficiently meaningful.
 Rule by Code
 “Governments of the Industrial World, you weary giants of flesh and steel, I
 come from Cyberspace, the new home of Mind.” Thus begins the
 Declaration of Independence of Cyberspace, written in 1996 by American
 author and political activist John Perry Barlow. Barlow continues: “You are
 not welcome among us. You have no sovereignty where we gather. . . . You
 have no moral right to rule us nor do you possess any methods of
enforcement we have true reason to fear.” Barlow regarded cyberspace as a
 place where individual sovereignty is neither derived from nor subordinate
 to the sovereignty of any state. Indeed, he believed that governments simply
 did not have the right, nor the effective capacity to, control this new world,
 saying “cyberspace does not lie within your borders.”2
 Barlow saw the Internet as an infrastructure governed by a set of
 protocols and standards (e.g., TCP/IP, HTTP, SMTP) encoded in the
 software and hardware layers of the network. Initially developed by the
 Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, many of these protocols were
 subsequently developed through an open and decentralized process, thanks
 to the voluntary efforts of developers, researchers, and engineers—and later
 standardized by nonprofit organizations such as the Internet Engineering
 Task Force or the World Wide Web Consortium. This process of open
source development and standardization allowed for rapid and
 permissionless innovation, where anyone with a computer and an Internet
 connection can develop and deploy new applications without having to seek
 authorization from anyone.
 Yet, Barlow’s vision of a new digital space that escapes from
 governmental control failed to anticipate the role that code could play in
 governing the digital realm. He did not foresee that this new independent
 space could easily be co-opted by a new set of (private) actors, eager to
 establish their own (technical) rules into the digital domain.
 The concentration of traffic in the hands of a few large online operators
 —chokepoints—is a threat to the open and decentralized nature of the
 Internet as originally envisioned by Barlow. Indeed, as companies like
 Google and Meta have grown in size and power, they have also come to
 exercise an increasingly large degree of control over the way we use the
 Internet. They have done this in a number of ways, including through the
 development of proprietary software and platforms that are not compatible
 with each other, through the use of algorithms that favor their own products
 and services over those of their competitors, and through the use of terms of
 service that give them the right to censor or delete content that they deem to
 be objectionable. Most importantly, these companies are leveraging code to
 precisely stipulate what users can or cannot do on their own platform, in
 ways that often go beyond3—and sometimes even contravene4—the laws of
 national jurisdictions.
Barlow’s vision of a new digital space that escapes from
 governmental control failed to anticipate the role that code could
 play in governing the digital realm.
 In his book Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace, Lawrence Lessig
 analyzed the various ways in which the architecture of the Internet—
 including both the software and hardware layers—can shape and govern our
 behaviors in the digital space.5 Drawing from his previous analysis of the
 four regulatory levers that can affect individual behaviors—law, market
 dynamics, social norms, and architecture (figure 4)—he concluded that on
 the Internet, architecture (or “code”) had become the predominant
 mechanism to regulate online behaviors—which he described as “code is
 law.”6
 Figure 4 Lessig’s four modes of regulation.
 In recent years, the development of the Internet has become increasingly
 dominated by a small number of large companies, which control large parts
 of the Internet infrastructure. These include the servers that host our data
 (e.g., Amazon), the social media platforms that connect us (e.g.,
 Facebook/Meta), the web browsers that we use and the operating systems
 that run our devices (e.g., Google/Android)—in addition to all the
 applications that we use to access our email, browse the web, use social
 media, and shop online. As a result, these online operators dictate what can
or cannot be technically done on their platforms, independently of what can
 or cannot be legally done.
 This has led to the emergence of cloud empires7 with new functional
 sovereigns8 reigning over our digital fiefdoms. Terms like “techno
feudalism”9 and the neighboring concept of “surveillance capitalism”10
 have now become popular in describing the power dynamics in the online
 world. According to many scholars, the Internet landscape no longer looks
 like an open marketplace of ideas or even a space driven by the logics of
 free market, competition, and capitalistic dynamics. Rather, the logics of
 monopolization, rent seeking, and expropriation have taken ground. The
 Internet has evolved into a space that is ruled by “rent and dispossession,
 rather than the capitalist logic of profit and exploitation.”11 In order words,
 the Internet has become a space where capitalism has progressively given
 way to feudalism.
 This new form of sovereignty presents a challenge to traditional forms of
 governance, as the rules that govern digital platforms are not always
 transparent or accountable to their “citizens.”12 Many democracies around
 the world operate according to the rule of law,13 which prescribes—among
 other things—the principle of equality before the law (nemo est supra legis,
 or “no one is above the law”). In principle, laws are supposed to be applied
 equally to all citizens, and the government is subject to the same laws as the
 citizens. This ensures that individuals have certain rights and protections
 and the government operates within legal boundaries. This also means that
 laws and regulations can only be enacted and enforced according to specific
 rules that are subject to a variety of formal, procedural, and substantive
 constraints.
 Conversely, some countries—mostly those under authoritarian regimes—
 operate according to the “rule by law.”14 In this context, laws are used to
 legitimize the actions of those in power rather than to protect the rights of
 citizens. Hence, the government is not necessarily subject to the same laws
 as the citizens, and laws may be selectively enforced or created to serve the
 interests of those in power. Because it prioritizes the government’s authority
 over the rights and freedoms of the individual, the rule by law can easily
 lead to abuses of power and corruption.
When it comes to the regulation of Internet platforms, online operators
 generally have full discretionary power over the rules they chose to codify
 into their platforms, often with no accountability to any external authority
 nor any checks and balances. We introduce the concept of the “rule by
 code” to describe the governance of these online platforms: a regime where
 online operators have the power (and the tendency) to design and amend the
 code and technological infrastructure of their online platforms, primarily as
 a means to serve their own economic or political interests. The rule by code,
 characterized by the instrumentalization of computer code to serve the
 interests of powerful tech companies, thus presents itself as the software
 equivalent of the rule by law, characterized by the arbitrary wielding of
 laws to serve the interests of powerful sovereigns.
 But the rule by code is not only instrumental to the interests of online
 operators. It can also serve the interest of governmental actors, insofar as
 the online operators that control the code are themselves under the
 jurisdiction of a sovereign authority. Indeed, many of the online platforms
 that are ruled by code can be (and have been) co-opted by established
 powers to serve their own political interests—as clearly shown by the
 successful efforts of US security services to collect data from large online
 platform operators at the expense of user privacy.15 As Lawrence Lessig
 had foreseen, the technological infrastructure of centralized online
 platforms can be instrumentalized as a means to further the interests of both
 private operators and the political sovereign that regulates them. Hence, if it
 is true that governments may have a hard time regulating the behaviors of
 Internet users through traditional legal means, it is also true that
 governments retain the power to regulate the operators of online platforms
 within their own jurisdiction, requiring them to encode specific rules into
 their technical platforms to indirectly regulate the users of these platforms.
 Despite the promises of early Internet advocates, today’s Internet is not
 free from governmental control. It is heavily regulated through a set of laws
 and regulations that are imposed by nation-states upon centralized
 intermediaries and online operators. These include, among others, the
 European Union’s Information Society Directive and the General Data
 Protection Regulation (GDPR), the US Digital Millennium Copyright Act,
 and the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act as well as more draconian
 measures such as the Chinese government’s Great Firewall for the
 censorship of online content. All these measures are intended to regulate
how online businesses can collect and use personal data, what their
 responsibilities are with regard to the content they host, and what type of
 content is accessible in each country. Sometimes, this plethora of
 regulations may lead to conflicting legal obligations across jurisdictions
 (e.g., copyright protection versus freedom of expression).
 Rule of Code
 We introduce the notion of the rule of code—by analogy to the rule of law
 —to illustrate how the core features of blockchain technology provide a set
 of fundamental features for blockchain-based networks and applications
 that distinguish them from traditional online applications (ruled by code) by
 inheriting some of the characteristics of the rule of law (in terms of
 traceability, verifiability, predictability, and accountability). While both
 traditional online platforms and blockchain-based systems rely on code to
 regulate online behaviors, there is nonetheless a fundamental difference in
 the way these two systems operate. Because there is no centralized
 authority controlling a public and permissionless blockchain network (i.e.,
 there is no sovereign), blockchain technology provides for the
 establishment of code-based rules that are difficult to co-opt for the benefits
 of a few. The operations of these networks therefore require a much more
 distributed and polycentric governance system, where a multiplicity of
 actors need to agree (through distributed consensus) toward a particular
 course of action. This stands in contrast to the Internet governance
 discussions of the early 2000s, which were largely focused on centralized
 institutions or online operators and the need to trust them.
 One of the most revolutionary aspects of blockchain technology—which
 is the most apparent in the context of public and permissionless blockchain
 networks—is its polycentric character. According to McGinnis,16
 polycentric systems consist of (1) multiple centers of decision-making
 authority with overlapping jurisdictions, (2) which interact through a
 process of mutual adjustment, (3) in order to generate a regularized pattern
 of overarching social order. Blockchain systems have the capacity to satisfy
 all three of these criteria.
The governance of public and permissionless blockchain networks is
 subject to multiple centers of decision-making, both endogenous and
 exogenous to the network. Examples of endogenous decision-making
 centers in the Ethereum ecosystem are full nodes (including validator
 nodes), staking pools, ETH holders, maximum extractable value (MEV)
 searchers, Ethereum core developers, Ethereum founders, and the Ethereum
 Foundation. Examples of exogenous decision-making centers are crypto
 exchanges, competing blockchain networks (e.g., Tezos, Cosmos, Cardano,
 EOS), regulatory bodies, policymakers, regulators, and a variety of
 entrepreneurs interfacing with the Ethereum network.17 There are also
 overlapping functions among both endogenous and exogenous decision
making centers, with the Ethereum founders and Ethereum core developers,
 for instance, having overlapping authority over the future roadmap of
 Ethereum.
 These multiple decision-making centers are in a constant process of
 interaction and mutual adjustment. For instance, Ethereum core developers
 and Ethereum nodes interact with one another whenever an upgrade is
 proposed for the network, as the latter are responsible for updating their
 clients to implement the upgrade. At the same time, the process of updating
 these clients can affect the planned development and roadmap of the
 Ethereum network. Similarly, companies that operate crypto exchanges are
 affected by laws and regulations that permit or restrict their activities, while
 the growing adoption and demand for cryptocurrencies, as indicated by
 growing crypto-exchange usage, can lead to changes in the relevant
 legislation. These endogenous and exogenous centers of decision-making
 also interact with one another across the edges of the network. For example,
 sanctions by state authorities on a series of smart contract addresses have
 caused some validators to censor transactions interacting with those
 addresses. At the same time, the actions and behavior of core developers
 can shape the perceptions of regulatory bodies and policymakers about the
 ability of developers to unilaterally change aspects of the protocol.
 Finally, when it comes to the last criterion, blockchain protocols and their
 consensus algorithms stipulate a set of rules that all members of the
 network must abide by. The public nature of these on-chain rules provides a
 considerable degree of transparency about outcomes and helps ensure that
 incentives and rules align. In addition to the rules encoded directly in the
 protocol of a blockchain (on-chain), there also exists an overarching system
of norms outlining the role of different decision-making centers with regard
 to the procedures and rules that must be followed to perform an operation
 off-chain, as for the various Bitcoin or Ethereum Improvement Proposals
 (BIPs and EIPs). Moreover, it often happens that the repeated patterns of
 interaction among multiple stakeholders give expression to a number of
 overarching norms and principles that most network participants abide by,
 such as the aspiration of immutability, irreversibility, and credible
 neutrality.
 Looking at blockchain networks as polycentric governance systems helps
 us shed light on the fact that these networks operate according to a specific
 set of rules, where both the definition and the execution of these rules is not
 subject to the whims of any single actor but rather emerge from a
 multiplicity of interdependent agents exerting influence on the system. As
 Aligica and Tarko explain, polycentric systems are “rule of law systems” as
 power is not centralized in the hands of a single actor and agents are
 constrained by the rule of law.18
 In sum, the rule of law refers to a system for governing human behavior
 whereby the laws are written down and applied equally to everyone,
 including the sovereign who remains accountable under the law.19 It stands
 in contrast to the rule by law, where rules are applied arbitrarily and
 unevenly, at the sovereign’s discretion. By analogy, the rule of code refers
 to a system for governing human behavior that is based on a series of code
based rules that apply equally to everyone regardless of their identity or
 role. As such, the rule of code stands in contrast to the arbitrary application
 of the rule by code by ensuring that no sovereign is above the code. This
 suggests that we may no longer need to trust the intentions of online
 operators as long as we have confidence in the operations of the code
 underpinning these new code-based applications.20
 The notion of the rule of code was first introduced in 2018 by De Filippi
 and Wright in their book Blockchain and the Law. It has acquired new
 prominence in recent years with the progressive rise in popularity of
 blockchain technology. One key implication of the rule of code, as opposed
 to the rule by code, is that it removes the need for trust in centralized
 institutions or online intermediaries who rule over the code. In a world
 governed by the rule of code, the code rules in place of the sovereign—just
 as in the rule of law, the law ultimately rules over the sovereign. No
government can interfere with a blockchain-based system, and no
 corporation can arbitrarily modify the code of a blockchain application
 because no one has the power to unilaterally modify the rules by which
 these systems operate—at least in theory.
 The rules are encoded in the code itself, and everyone is subject to the
 same rules. Yet, this is not to say that the rule of code cannot be changed.
 The point is not for the rule of code to be immutable but rather for it to only
 be changeable in specific circumstances, in a decentralized and transparent
 way. That is, anyone can propose a change to the code, and the community
 can vote on whether to implement the change. This is similar to the way
 that laws are supposed to be amended under the rule of law.
 Early blockchain advocates believed that the supremacy of code in
 blockchain-based systems would leave human inefficiencies and corruption
 behind.21 They imagined a world where everyone would be bound by the
 same rules, accepted collectively by the community and enforced
 automatically by the underlying technological infrastructure, regardless of
 the identity or roles of the people concerned. As it turned out, this vision
 didn’t come to life. Despite the technical issues and security flaws that
 some blockchain-based systems have witnessed over the years, the biggest
 challenge they encounter today is related to their governance structures.22
 One cannot assume that any blockchain application, by the mere fact of
 running on top of a blockchain, implements the rule of code. Indeed, it is
 often unclear who ultimately makes decisions about a project’s
 development and what kind of participation or decision-making power have
 been granted to the various stakeholders. The governance of many existing
 blockchain applications is often highly centralized, either because the smart
 contract is controlled by a few actors through a multisignature wallet or
 because the governance tokens are concentrated in the hands of a few
 individuals.23
 Moreover, while blockchain-based networks and applications are more
 likely to abide by the rule of code, there are many applications that interface
 with one or more blockchain systems while nonetheless abiding by the rule
 by code. This is the case, for instance, of many cryptocurrency exchanges,
 like Coinbase, Kraken, Binance, or the now infamous FTX, which are
 intended to facilitate the trading of various digital assets. Despite
 interfacing with a blockchain, these platforms are no different from
traditional centralized online platforms: they are operated by companies
 incorporated in a particular jurisdiction and are therefore bound by the rules
 of that jurisdiction.
 The recent legal actions by the US Securities and Exchange Commission
 (SEC) and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) against
 Coinbase and Binance highlight the regulatory challenges that centralized
 crypto exchanges face in the United States. The claim is that these
 exchanges have not only listed cryptocurrencies and tokens that the SEC
 believes are securities but have also operated as unregistered brokers.
 Similarly, in Europe, the European Parliament and Council of the
 European Union recently passed the Markets in Crypto-Assets (MiCA)
 regulation,24 extending jurisdiction to a variety of services not previously
 addressed by existing European financial regulations. The MiCA regulation
 applies to specific crypto assets (including commodity-backed or currency
backed stablecoins, e-money tokens, and other utility tokens but not NFTs)
 and associated issuers or service providers (such as custodial wallets,
 cryptocurrency exchanges, and crypto-portfolio management agencies).
 Under MiCA, crypto-asset providers are required to furnish comprehensive
 information concerning the crypto assets they issue, while adhering to
 disclosure and transparency rules. Meanwhile, crypto-asset service
 providers must undergo registration and enforce security protocols while
 adhering to antimoney laundering (AML) provisions. Yet, the MiCA
 regulation explicitly stipulates that it does not apply to all blockchain-based
 financial services that are provided in a “fully decentralized manner” and
 “without any intermediaries.”25 While it is currently unclear what may or
 may not qualify as “full decentralization,” this provision effectively
 excludes (at least a portion of) what is generally referred to as DeFi from its
 scope.
 Accordingly, legal liability becomes an important reason for favoring the
 rule of code over the rule by code when designing a blockchain-based
 system. Under the rule by code, whoever has the power to control the
 system’s execution will also be held responsible for the outcome of such
 execution. Conversely, under the rule of code, the blockchain network itself
 is the authority that controls the system’s execution and all the operations
 that occur within that system. The network participants are the users or, at
 best, the maintainers of the system and therefore cannot be held
individually liable for the outcome of such operations. While some have
 argued26 that the developers or designers of a blockchain-based systems are
 responsible for ensuring that the system is secure and operates as expected,
 such claim was refuted in a recent legal judgment27 (under appeal at the
 time of writing). The judgment held that blockchain-based systems are
 developed by a fluctuating group of developers, many of whom are
 anonymous, and assigning liability to any of them would create an
 excessive burden on these few blockchain developers who can actually be
 identified. However, as discussed below, even under the rule of code,
 blockchain developers are not exempt from liability risks altogether as
 governments have already found ways to incriminate developers based on
 alternative grounds.28
 Given the potential liability affecting many blockchain-based
 applications, there has been a progressive shift toward decentralizing
 blockchain projects that were originally implemented with a relatively
 centralized governance structure (rule by code) and progressively evolved
 into a DAO (rule of code). This process of “progressive decentralization”29
 has been put into practice, for instance, by Gitcoin (created in 2017 but only
 introducing a governance token in 2021) and MakerDAO (a stablecoin
 project operated at first via a foundation, which successfully engaged into a
 process of progressive decentralization in order to grow into a full-fledged
 DAO). All these initiatives can now be said to be governed by the rule of
 code in that there is no single actor (or group of actors) who can control or
 influence their operations, in a discretionary and unilateral manner.
 Legal Tensions
 While the rule of code presents a variety of benefits in terms of governance
 and resilience, when it comes to compliance with the law, there is a
 fundamental tension between the rule of code and the rule of law.30 Indeed,
 because of the inherent properties of blockchain code, which is
 unambiguous and deterministic, the rule of code does not (and cannot)
 operate according to the same principles as the rule of law.
This is particularly visible in the context of property and contract law.
 Property is defined by law and can therefore also be taken away by the law.
 This means that anyone who acquires a particular asset in a way that is
 deemed to be illegitimate by the law will not be regarded as the legal owner
 of that asset and could potentially get it taken away by a court order.
 Conversely, in the context of blockchain-based assets, like cryptocurrencies
 or tokens, ownership is defined by the code of the blockchain-based system,
 and regardless of what the law says, no one has the power to seize these
 assets unless the code specifically provides for such a possibility. Similarly,
 in the context of contracts, legal contracts must be enforced by a third-party
 authority following the interpretation of the contractual terms in light of the
 provisions of contract law. In contrast, the code of a smart contract is
 automatically executed by the underlying blockchain infrastructure in a
 deterministic manner. This execution occurs regardless of whether the code
 properly reflects the parties’ intentions or is compatible with the provisions
 of contract law.
 This discrepancy with existing legal rules may be leveraged deliberately
 by some actors, purposely deploying blockchain-based applications to
 evade existing regulations (e.g., taxation and securities laws). Given that in
 the context of a permissionless blockchain network, or in the case of a
 decentralized blockchain-based application or DAO, no centralized entity
 can be held accountable for the activities undertaken on these blockchain
based systems, it becomes difficult to impute liability for any illicit act
 achieved through or via these systems. In other words, if the offender is not
 a legal entity but an actual piece of smart contract code, who should be held
 accountable for the offense?
 As opposed to other technologies that can be more easily shut down by
 governmental authorities, it is relatively harder to effectively sanction
 blockchain-based systems (except in some rare situations, as described in
 the following section)—although those who publish or interact with the
 code might be incriminated. Because all transactions on a blockchain are
 recorded on a public ledger, these transactions can be traced back to the
 digital addresses of the participants in the network. Consequently, when an
 illicit transaction is made on a blockchain network, the transaction is visible
 on the public ledger, and the pseudonymous identity of the participant who
 made the transaction is also recorded. In principle, this could be used to
 trace an offender’s real-world identity. In practice, however, it is very
difficult to trace the identity of an offender in a blockchain network due to
 the pseudonymous nature of digital addresses. This challenge did not
 prevent regulators from enforcing the law in an emerging battle for
 supremacy between the rule of code and the rule of law.31
 Take the infamous case of Silk Road, which was a dark web marketplace
 that was used to buy and sell illegal drugs and other illegal items. The
 marketplace was only accessible through the Tor network, a network that
 allows users to remain anonymous. Silk Road’s payment system was
 operated via the pseudonymous Bitcoin blockchain. Hence, Silk Road users
 could buy and sell illegal items without revealing their real-world identities.
 In 2013, the FBI shut down Silk Road and arrested Ross Ulbricht, the
 individual operating under the pseudonym “Dread Pirate Roberts.” Despite
 the pseudonymous nature of the Bitcoin blockchain used for transactions on
 the site, it is not completely anonymous. This allowed the FBI to analyze
 the blockchain and link the digital addresses used by Dread Pirate Roberts
 to Ulbricht’s identity.
 Silk Road demonstrates that blockchain-based systems are not immune to
 law enforcement agencies. Although it can be very difficult to trace the real
world identity of a blockchain user, it is not impossible. In addition, it is
 important to note that the FBI was only able to arrest Ross Ulbricht because
 Silk Road was not a truly decentralized marketplace. Although it was using
 the Bitcoin blockchain for payments, it was not fully decentralized in its
 operation. As the operator of Silk Road, Pirate Robert was thus held
 responsible for the illicit activities that were undertaken onto the platform.
 Another example of legal enforcement over a blockchain-based system is
 the case of Ooki DAO. The CFTC filed a complaint against the operations
 of Ooki DAO,32 which was allegedly in violation of the Commodity
 Exchange Act by allowing users to engage in retail commodity derivative
 trading transactions without registering as a trading platform. The court
 held that although Ooki DAO had not been incorporated into a legal entity,
 it could be regarded as a general partnership or unincorporated association
 because it was “formed by mutual consent for the purpose of promoting a
 common objective” and could therefore be sued. To the extent that token
 holders could vote to promote the common objective of governing the Ooki
 protocol, ownership of governance tokens can result in DAO members
 being considered co-administrators or general partners of the DAO. This
means that all members of the DAO are legally responsible for any actions
 taken by the DAO, and since there is no limited liability protection, the
 collective liability of the DAO becomes the individual liability of each
 member.
 Yet, while all members of an unincorporated association are typically
 jointly and severally liable, in the case of Ooki DAO, given that many token
 holders were not active participants in the DAO, the court considered that
 liability would only be imputed to token holders who effectively exercised
 the governance rights associated with these tokens. Using their tokens to
 influence the activities of the DAO means that they are voluntarily
 becoming a member of the unincorporated association that governs the
 Ooki protocol. As a result, even though only the founders were held
 responsible for violating laws in the Ooki DAO case, the case suggests that
 in the future, all active token holders of a DAO could be held personally
 accountable for any illegal actions taken by the DAO, not just the founders.
 Because of these measures, anyone who interacts with the smart contract
 addresses will be held strictly liable, meaning there is no need to prove ill
intention or even awareness of the sanctions.
 * * *
 By revisiting the core properties of blockchain technology described in the
 previous chapters, chapter 3 focused on assessing their compatibility with
 established legal principles rooted in the rule of law. On the one hand, the
 chapter discussed how blockchain-based systems endeavor to emulate
 certain aspects of the rule of law by introducing what we refer to as the rule
 of code, made of predefined, automated, and transparent rules encoded
 directly into the technological fabric. This represents a fundamental shift
 from the more traditional rule by code of centralized online platforms as it
 guarantees that the code applies equally to everyone and no one stands
 “above the code.” On the other hand, the chapter has shed light on some of
 the inherent limitations of this emerging paradigm of code-driven
 regulation, which might potentially come into conflict with existing
 regulatory frameworks. The insights from this chapter will inform the
 regulatory strategies and discussion in chapters 6 and 7.
 OceanofPDF.com
4
 Problem of Trust
 Oh, you have trusted somebody? Glad to hear of any instance of that sort. Reflects well
 upon all men.
 —Herman Melville, The Confidence Man1
 Con Men
 On a day in April, in nineteenth-century America, a stranger boards a boat
 traveling along the Mississippi. Unbeknownst to his fellow passengers, he
 is a “confidence man.” He plays psychological tricks on them, gaining their
 confidence to have a personal advantage. This central premise of Herman
 Melville’s novel The Confidence Man popularized an infamous figure in
 American society. The confidence man (commonly abbreviated as “con
 man”),2 according to Melville, is a stranger “in the extremest sense of the
 word.”3 A stranger, following sociologist Georg Simmel,4 is a figure who
 unites nearness and remoteness, elements found in every human
 relationship; being physically close, part of a group (like the stranger on the
 boat), but in all other aspects “far,” unknown, unfamiliar. The interesting
 thing about strangers is that we sometimes confide our most intimate
 thoughts to them because they lack the subjectivity and prejudice of the
 people near to us, who are part of our community of belonging.
 America in the mid-nineteenth century was a special place because it was
 an eminent example of a society of strangers. People came from
 everywhere, from all backgrounds. Especially in sprawling metropolises
 like New York City, no one could be fully trusted outside of one’s close-knit
 community because the place lacked what Simmel calls “organic”
 connections, built on shared histories and rituals of small communities or
 friends and family ties. Instead, America had to rely on “inorganic”
 connections: a shared language (English), monetary system (the dollar),
 civic education, and a set of social etiquettes. Many of these connections
 are mediated via sociotechnical systems, involving the interaction of social
and technical components and subsystems. They also include things like
 credit reporting, which established a common, if very biased, measure of
 moral character.5 These inorganic connections provide a common basis to
 confide in strangers. A confidence man is trained in exploiting these
 commonalities, relying on social systems like fashion and etiquette to
 appear respectable, kind, and reasonable—a model citizen.
 The protagonist of The Confidence Man was, in all likelihood, modeled
 on a swindler named Thompson, who had been apprehended in New York
 City in 1849. He was found in possession of a great number of stolen
 watches that he had obtained from random strangers. One day later, his
 arrest was mentioned in the New York Herald: “For the last few months a
 man has been traveling about the city, known as the ‘Confidence Man’; that
 is, he would go up to a perfect stranger in the street, and being a man of
 genteel appearance, would easily command an interview. Upon this
 interview he would say, after some little conversation, ‘have you confidence
 in me to trust me with your watch until tomorrow.’”6
 Three days later, the newspaper opened with a new piece. It wrote that
 the idea of the confidence man has to be extended beyond that of the
 individual swindler, for there are also confidence men of merchandise and
 politics. The real confidence men, the Herald claimed, are the people high
 up in the palaces of society: the bankers, the politicians, the financiers. The
 real “confidence man” is the one who lives and works on Wall Street.7
 More than 150 years later, Satoshi Nakamoto had a similar epiphany. He
 lamented the “trust-based model” underlying the financial system, whose
 credibility had eroded in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis. Like the
 swindler Thompson, the bankers had exploited people’s confidence, albeit
 not in systems of etiquette and fashion but in the financial system. What had
 seemed to be an “objective” system that people took for granted with an
 unquestioning attitude had suddenly become highly questionable. People
 realized that without noticing it, they had confided in the banking sector as
 a third party that would take care of their finances. Contrary to the public’s
 expectation, investment bankers had engaged in mind-blowing swindling,
 selling garbage-grade financial products, and eventually burdened the
 public with their imprudence through an unprecedented bailout. Nakamoto
 believed that in a society of strangers, trust can be a liability. It had to be
 done away with.
The real “confidence man” is the one who lives and works on
 Wall Street.
 This thought is not foreign to political philosophy. In writing The
 Confidence Man, Melville had been inspired by Thomas Hobbes.8 In
 Hobbes’s state of nature, in which everyone is a stranger, there is always the
 possibility of distrust. In fact, Hobbes insisted that we should always be on
 our guard, for you can never be sure whether someone is trustworthy.
 Because there might be con men among us, we have to fear anyone we
 meet. Hobbes’s Leviathan is a solution to the state of nature that resolves
 the problem of trust. By handing over our rights to the sovereign, we get
 security in return, which allows us to confide in strangers. We can now be
 confident that whoever transgresses the social contract will inevitably be
 sanctioned, which thus makes cooperation with strangers much easier. Yet,
 Hobbes dismissed the positive function that trust and trusting others can
 have in society. Trust plays an important role in cementing interhuman
 relationships. Empirical evidence suggests that we are social animals9 and
 our sense of trusting each other is embedded in our existence from the
 moment we are born, enabling us to undertake beneficial forms of
 cooperation. Researchers of evolution and child psychology have found that
 without the initial emergence of mutual trust and toleration—for example,
 in 
voluntarily tempering competition for food and demonstrating
 willingness to share—the choice for humans to collaborate would not be
 possible.10 As Bowles and Gintis observed in A Cooperative Species, while
 humans may act like rational, self-interested, and competitive homines
 economici under market conditions with complete contracts, social
 preferences including fairness and concern for others’ well-being has an
 important function for societal survival in the many other settings where
 contracts are not complete.11
 Trust, Confidence, and Systems
 Sociologists have extensively discussed trust, particularly in response to the
 well-known reflections on trust by systems theorist Niklas Luhmann.12
 Luhmann considered the necessity of distinguishing between familiarity,
trust, and confidence. He believed that the trust we exhibit to a loved one is
 quite different from the trust we exhibit when we interact with a stranger. In
 the former case, we actually trust the person, intentionally putting ourselves
 in a situation of vulnerability—and thus blaming us, and the loved one, if
 that person ends up betraying our trust. In the latter case, we do not trust the
 stranger as such but rather rely on a series of societal systems (e.g., the legal
 system and associated enforcement authorities, a set of community norms
 and peer pressure) that contribute to increasing the confidence in the good
 outcome of the interaction. This is what Luhman calls system trust, or more
 colloquially, confidence. If the stranger acts against our interest, we will not
 feel a sense of betrayal because we never trusted the stranger; rather, we
 will recalibrate our confidence in the system or systems that brought us to
 interact with the stranger. In other words, while confidence plays a similar
 function as trust in that it brings us to interact with others, it is different
 because confidence does not involve a sense of risk or vulnerability but
 rather a sense of predictability due to individual expectations toward the
 functioning of a system.
 Perhaps the most important takeaway from the academic discussion on
 trust and confidence is that these are rich and ambiguous notions, with no
 single established definition. Rather than trying to come up with a reductive
 account of these terms, let us try here to delineate the differences between
 the two terms.
 From Luhmann’s systems theory perspective, humans, groups, and
 societies are systems interacting with their respective environments. These
 interactions are characterized by a sense of familiarity—everything that
 humans recognize as part of their lifeworld—and unfamiliarity, the strange.
 The unfamiliar entails a certain degree of uncertainty, requiring mechanisms
 to cope with this uncertainty. As Luhmann describes, medieval Christian
 societies accomplished this by means of religion, whose function was to
 bring the unfamiliar within the theological worldview that was more
 familiar to believers. Even accidents would be regarded as fate or as the
 will of God. This changed with the secular notion of risk, which turned
 uncertainty from a matter of fate into something that would potentially lie
 within the control of human agency. What scholars generally agree upon is
 that both trust and confidence are means to cope with uncertainty in terms
 of risk. However, the former involves accepting the risk and engaging in a
 situation of vulnerability toward the trustee, whereas the latter involves
creating systems to reduce uncertainty and therefore decrease the risk
 associated with a particular situation.
 Hence, while the two phenomena share a common basis and are, to some
 extent, interdependent, they remain significantly distinct from one another.
 The most extreme form of trust exists between people with strong ties,
 especially family members and friends. People who benefit from those ties
 can take conscious risks by establishing trust dependencies and acting
 altruistically, making themselves vulnerable to betrayal.
 Moving away from this extreme form of interpersonal trust, we encounter
 trust between citizens of a political community, conceptualized by Pettit13
 as “civility,” a general sense of benevolence and civic mindedness
 cultivated by peer pressure and reputation. This type of trust is not
 grounded in emotion but is a rational and voluntary process, similar to what
 Hardin14 called the rational evaluation of “encapsulated interest.” The idea
 here is that trust exists as one expects that fellow citizens have a desire for
 establishing a trust relationship because it is in their own rational interests
 to do so. Still, these forms of civic trust don’t operate as well in a large
scale setting, as evidenced by Melville’s story of the confidence man. In an
 open society of strangers, civility or encapsulated interest often stands on
 shaky grounds, and one might easily fall prey to a swindler.
 We move on to what Luhmann calls “confidence.” Confidence rests on
 shared expectations, which are not simply the result of a leap of faith—as in
 the case of trust—but are supported by a particular understanding of the
 world that is regarded as sufficiently predictable as to remove any sense of
 uncertainty and therefore risk. Confidence can emerge both from general or
 embodied knowledge (e.g., our confidence in cryptography is based on our
 understanding of mathematics) or repeated experiences (e.g., our
 confidence that the sun will rise every morning is grounded on the fact that
 we have experienced it all our life). Confidence can also be intentionally
 constructed by creating sociotechnical systems specifically designed to
 constrain or regulate parts of the environment in order to make them
 controllable—like through the use of law enforcement or the physical walls
 of a prison. Often, these two mechanisms overlap. Consider, for instance,
 the monetary system. Confidence is key to this system as people will only
 accept money if they expect it to constitute an effective means of payment
 and that its value will be relatively stable to acquire goods and services over
time. At the same time, the monetary system is a sociotechnical system with
 central banks controlling the issuance of currency and setting bank interest
 rates, among other things, and regulators ensuring that loans are sufficiently
 collateralized and clients’ funds are properly held in custody. As such, the
 monetary system, along with its key players and regulatory authorities,
 allows strangers to interact with one another—even without any prior trust
 relationships—because it builds up confidence based on a set of shared
 expectations of a (seemingly) predictable system.
 Yet, as the 2008 global financial crisis has shown, confidence in the
 monetary system is still based on underlying trust relations. Some of these
 relations are akin to a problematic form of encapsulated interests (e.g.,
 reputation of bankers depending on extreme risk-taking behavior); others
 are linked to specific trust relations between bankers and politicians. This
 seemingly predictable system can suddenly breach our expectations or even
 betray us when we realize that we have made ourselves vulnerable to the
 whims of corruptible or unreliable financial institutions or other trusted
 authorities.
 This underlying layer of trust has become fairly visible, for instance,
 when payments toward Wikileaks were blocked by the major American
 payment providers in 2011,15 revealing that we inadvertently trusted these
 intermediary authorities, which have the authority to decide whether and
 how our money can be spent. This is precisely when Nakamoto’s invention
 truly proved its worth, for it allowed people to bypass the ban of these
 providers and continue to support Wikileaks by sending payments in
 Bitcoin. The confidence in the operations of the Bitcoin network is thus, at
 least apparently, much more significant than the confidence we put in the
 traditional financial system.
 The Confidence Machine
 What the Wikileaks episode suggests is that Bitcoin is a technology that
 produces confidence without the need for underlying trust relations. While
 it has often been stated that blockchain is a “trustless” technology that
 purports to eliminate the “need” for trust,16 it has not been clear from the
 outset what would replace the trust that is removed. Similarly, the claim
that this technology replaces trust in a known other with trust in an unknown
 other17 does not provide sufficient insight of the nature of trust in systems.
 From the discussion above, it becomes clear that the blockchain is a
 “confidence machine.”18 What this means is that a blockchain establishes
 robust shared expectations between participants interacting through it by
 means of a combination of technologies that create and maintain a high
 degree of predictability regarding the blockchain’s operations. Because of
 this, participants can adopt an “unquestioning attitude” toward the
 technology, not having to take any conscious risk regarding its basic
 operations. That is, once a transaction is made, one can feel confident that
 the transaction will execute as expected, without the risk of any interference
 from a third party.
 While the technical features of blockchain technology have been
 explored in chapter 2, we need to consider how these produce the
 confidence implied in the notion of a confidence machine. The question
 thus becomes how blockchain technology maintains a high degree of
 predictability in its operations, without trusted intermediaries. Answering
 this question revolves around considering three aspects of the workings of
 blockchain technologies: (1) cryptographic primitives, (2) deterministic
 computing, and (3) distributed consensus (figure 5).
Figure 5 The confidence machine. Source: Primavera De Filippi, Morshed Mannan, and Wessel
 Reijers, “Blockchain as a Confidence Machine: The Problem of Trust and Challenges of
 Governance,” 
Technology 
in 
Society 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101284.
 62 
(August 
2020): 
101284,
 First, blockchain technology relies on cryptographic primitives (well
established, low-level cryptographic algorithms commonly used in
 cryptographic protocols) to create predictability. This predictability comes
 from the asymmetric nature of public-key cryptography as well as the
 verifiability and nonreversibility of hash functions (see chapter 2). Public
private key cryptography is an essential component of blockchain
 technology that helps to establish confidence in the system. In a blockchain
based system, every user has a unique public-private key pair, which is used
 to securely conduct transactions on the network. When a user initiates a
 transaction, they use their private key to digitally sign the transaction,
 which serves as proof of origin and authenticity. The transaction is then
 broadcasted to the network, and other users can verify the transaction’s
 validity using the sender’s public key. The public key acts as an address that
 is visible to everyone on the network, while the private key is kept secret
 and known only to the owner. This asymmetrical relationship ensures that
 transactions can be securely conducted without revealing the owner’s
 identity. By using public-private key cryptography, blockchain-based
systems ensure that only the rightful owner of a digital asset can initiate
 transactions and prove their ownership. This feature adds a layer of security
 and confidence to the system as users can be assured that their assets are
 protected from unauthorized access or fraudulent activity.
 Hash functions are another fundamental component of the confidence
 machine as they generate a high level of predictability concerning the
 immutability of data recorded on a blockchain. Hash functions are
 mathematical algorithms that take an input of any length and produce a
 fixed-size output known as a hash, or a “digital fingerprint.” In a
 blockchain-based system, each block contains a hash of all the transactions
 included in the block as well as a hash of the previous block in the chain.
 This creates an unbreakable link between blocks and ensures the
 immutability of transactions recorded into a blockchain, as any change in a
 single block would result in a different hash, invalidating the entire chain’s
 integrity.
 Second, deterministic computation suggests there is a one-to-one relation
 between the inputs and outputs of any blockchain transaction. This stems
 from the fact that computer code deployed on a blockchain executes in a
 formal, nonambiguous, and deterministic manner. As such, it brings a
 degree of predictability that is absent from natural language: a message
 transmitted to blockchain code leaves no room for interpretation and will
 always result in the exact same outcome. This is a critical feature of
 blockchain technology as it ensures that all nodes on the network can
 independently verify the validity of transactions and maintain the
 blockchain’s integrity.
 Third, blockchain technology relies on distributed consensus to extend
 the determinacy from a single computer to that of a network of nodes,
 ensuring that every node will produce the same order of transactions. This
 generates a high level of predictability that transactions are unambiguous
 not only in terms of their content but also in terms of their chronological
 order. Distributed consensus algorithms constitute the basis for a
 decentralized peer-to-peer validation of transactions, leveraging economic
 incentives to ensure that all peers in the network cooperate toward
 maintaining and operating the network, with no incentives to free ride. To
 be sure, this only works under the assumption that all miners are rational,
utility-maximizing economic agents who only act to maximize their profits
 and are therefore highly predictable in their behaviors.
 Together, these aspects ensure a high level of predictability and therefore
 confidence in the system. As Nick Szabo argued, blockchains seek to
 substitute “rust in the secret and arbitrarily mutable activities of a private
 computation” with “verifiable confidence in the behavior of a generally
 immutable public computation.”19 As discussed in chapter 2, Szabo, in
 developing the concept of the smart contract, invoked the analogy of the
 vending machine. A vending machine is a highly deterministic mechanical
 system that is fully predictable: throwing in a coin in the machine will give
 access to the selected product. The technology envelopes a “mechanical
 contract” rather than a legal one. Hence, rather than relying on the legal
 system and police force to guarantee the legal contract’s execution, the
 technological infrastructure of the vending machine guarantees the
 execution of the mechanical contract. There is thus no longer any need for
 trust, nor (ex post) enforcement, as the contract is automatically executed
 by technological means, at least in theory.
 Bringing Trust Back In
 Just as any other sociotechnical system, vending machines are liable to the
 tricks of confidence men. There is outright vandalism, which vending
 machines can be protected against, but there are also much more
 sophisticated ways to cheat on them. The point that vending machines are
 still vulnerable to confidence tricks is brought home by the example of
 Tommy Glen Carmichael,20 a famous swindler with a curious addiction.
 Carmichael was in the habit of finding ways to “cheat” on the vending
 machine’s close relative: the slot machine. He would dissect slot machines
 at home, learning about their inner workings, to find a way to circumvent
 them. This is how he developed the “Monkey Paw,” a flexible tool made,
 among other things, of guitar strings that one could slide into a slot
 machine’s payment channel. This would trigger the microswitch controlling
 the payout channel, resulting in all the cash to be released. Despite being
 caught and put in prison, Carmichael kept his addiction and was in constant
 competition with slot machine makers. When the industry produced a new
machine that used a sensor to keep track of the number of coins that were
 paid out, Carmichael invented the “light wand,” a light that would blind the
 sensor, thereby disabling it. He would sell his inventions to other con men
 on the dark market, wreaking havoc on the gambling industry and causing
 damages amounting to hundreds of millions.
 Carmichael’s story brings home the message that even though slot
 machines, like smart contracts, appear to offer fully predictable executions
 of programmed actions, they can be compromised. And while only a
 physical tool is needed to compromise the slot machine, there are multiple
 ways to compromise a blockchain network, which reveal the
 interdependency between trust and confidence. This can be illustrated by
 the case of the Steem blockchain,21 an online social media platform, similar
 to Reddit or Medium but decentralized. Steem’s innovation was a new way
 to curate content, giving users the possibility to use Steem tokens to upvote
 and downvote content. The Steem blockchain is governed through
 distributed consensus, where a set of community members—called
 “witnesses”—are selected based on their reputation, which they can gain
 from community votes.22 The top twenty witnesses are the elected block
 producers, who are practically in control of the blockchain network’s
 maintenance and operation. At the moment of the launch, however, some of
 Steem founders locked up a large amount of their tokens, which became
 infamously known as the “ninjamined” stake.23
 Enter Justin Sun, a flamboyant and savvy Chinese blockchain
 entrepreneur, founder, and CEO of the Tron blockchain network. As Sun
 decided to purchase Steem, he became entitled to the ninjamined tokens,
 which gave him a significant influence in the governance of the Steem
 blockchain. As a response, the Steem community voted to implement a soft
 fork to prevent Sun from accessing and voting with these premined tokens,
 as a protection mechanism to avoid a hostile takeover. Yet, Sun had a trick
 up his sleeve. Using his personal influence at some of the major crypto
 exchanges, he leveraged the Steem tokens held in custody by those crypto
 exchanges to elect his own trusted witnesses, thereby effectively seizing
 control over the Steem blockchain.
 This is a fascinating episode of a blockchain community trying to prevent
 one influential individual from taking over a blockchain network, with the
 “empire striking back.”24 It suggests that trust had not disappeared
altogether but had merely been distributed among a network of actors. The
 role of the exchanges, backing up Sun’s claim, demonstrates that even in a
 decentralized blockchain network, there can be centralized points of failure,
 enabling individuals to take control over the network. First, some of the
 initial developers of the Steem blockchain created a trust-based liability by
 creating the ninjamined stake. More generally, developers and open-source
 contributors to a blockchain network can have significant influence, not
 only at the inception phase but also in its course of evolution. Indeed, the
 production and maintenance of the codebase on open-source platforms like
 GitHub is typically organized in a considerably centralized and hierarchical
 manner. While open-source development might seem like a purely technical
 affair at the outset, it often involves making political choices that steer the
 operations of a blockchain network.
 Second, token holders can exert significant influence on a blockchain
 network, as illustrated by Sun’s large amount of tokens holding, which gave
 him the means to influence the blockchain governance and elect new
 witnesses. Finally, external parties like policymakers and regulators can
 impact the trust relations in the nexus of actors orbiting around a
 blockchain-based network. For instance, regulators could crack down on the
 behavior of individual actors like Sun,25 affecting the extent to which they
 are trusted by other actors.
 It could well be argued that the Steem blockchain was vulnerable because
 it was an imperfect version of the confidence machine. Its weakness was the
 design of its consensus mechanism. Leveraging a delegated system instead
 of Bitcoin’s PoW system, it relied on trust relations from the outset. Yet, as
 we will further explore in chapter 5, even the Ethereum blockchain (which
 at the time used a PoW consensus mechanism) has encountered a
 significant breach of confidence, in the aftermath of an incident known as
 The DAO attack. Also, in more robust ecosystems like Ethereum, trust
 relations between the different typologies of actors mentioned above impact
 the functioning of the confidence machine.
 Accordingly, while it is clearly the case that blockchain technologies
 reduce the need for trust and increase confidence in the system, it is wrong
 to describe them as trustless systems since trust can never be eliminated.
 Rather, trust is distributed among a network of actors, making it difficult for
 any single actor to unilaterally breach the rules of the system. Exceptional
events like the Steem takeover have brought the underlying trust relations to
 the surface. Instead of denying the existence of these trust relations,
 blockchain proponents would therefore do better to account for the role that
 trust plays in these systems—which can be seen as both a strength and a
 liability. Trust is a liability when trust relations undermine the integrity of a
 blockchain network, for instance, in the way that Sun leveraged his
 connections at major exchanges. Yet, it can also help saving and
 strengthening the integrity of a network, for instance, by providing the basis
 for a community to react against an attack (as will be discussed in chapter
 5).
 The moral of the story is that trust in the governance of a blockchain
based system is necessary for it to qualify as a proper confidence machine.
 To manage this trust, blockchain communities must leverage both on- and
 off-chain governance strategies and solutions. On-chain solutions to
 improve trust in governance may involve implementing new types of
 consensus mechanisms or more robust voting systems, which off-chain
 solutions may involve procedural and substantive modes of community
 governance. For instance, procedural safeguards could be put in place to
 determine the course of action of key actors like core developers and major
 token holders deciding on a recommended protocol update.
 * * *
 By way of a discussion of trust and confidence in sociology and political
 theory, chapter 4 questioned the alleged trustless nature of blockchain
 technology. It showed that blockchain technology should rather be regarded
 as a confidence machine that displaces trust without, however, eliminating
 it. The chapter elaborated how the cultural values and political beliefs of
 actors involved in the governance of a blockchain can impact newfound
 trust relations. Trust, it turns out, still plays an important role in—and
 emphasizes the importance of—blockchain governance. In the next
 chapters, we will explore these and other forms of blockchain governance,
 which are aimed at managing the underlying trust relations for the sake of
 making the confidence machine operate more effectively.
 OceanofPDF.com
5
 States of Exception
 The exception is more interesting than the rule. The rule proves nothing; the exception
 proves everything.
 —Carl Schmitt, Political Theology1
 Waiting for Barbarians
 The magistrate rules over a sleepy frontier settlement at the edge of a vast
 empire. For as long as he can remember, the settlement had been peaceful
 and prosperous. One day, however, a man by the name of Colonel Joll
 arrives, who represents the empire’s powerful intelligence service. The
 magistrate recounts their first meeting: “We do not discuss the reason for
 his being here. He is here under the emergency powers, that is enough.”2 In
 his novel Waiting for the Barbarians, the Nobel Laureate John M. Coetzee
 thematizes a long-standing debate in legal and political philosophy about
 the relation between political power and the state of emergency. He
 recounts how the “emergency” has to do with an imminent threat: the
 possibility of a barbarian insurrection. This threat justifies the application of
 powers that would otherwise be beyond the purview of the law, including
 horrendous torture. The state of emergency necessitates suspending the law
 to deal with a situation that the normal legal order is supposedly incapable
 of addressing. Coetzee was inspired by a poem of the same title by the
 Greek poet Cavafy, which concludes with a twist: at the end of the day, the
 barbarians never arrive. “Now what’s going to happen to us without
 barbarians?” Cavafy writes, “Those people were a kind of solution.”3
 The poem’s twist reveals something important: the empire does not
 merely respond to an emergency to protect itself from outside danger;
 rather, the palpable risk of an emergency constitutes its power to continue to
 exist. As the magistrate muses, “one thought alone preoccupies the
 submerged mind of empire: how not to end, how not to die, how to prolong
its era.”4 In the first half of the twentieth century, the controversial5 German
 legal theorist Carl Schmitt developed his concept of politics by building on
 a similar intuition, namely that the origin of political power lies in the
 existential distinction between friend and enemy. The enemy, the
 “barbarian,” is not only a threat but also necessary for political power to
 sustain itself. The reason is that whoever has the ultimate decision-making
 power in a political system, the sovereign is he “who decides on the
 exception.”6 The enemy represents the latent possibility of the exception, an
 unlikely event or act that threatens the sovereign. Deciding on that
 possibility is, according to Schmitt, what politics is all about.
 The state of emergency necessitates suspending the law to deal
 with a situation that the normal legal order is supposedly
 incapable of addressing.
 But what is the exception? There is no straightforward answer to this
 question. Perhaps, with Taleb,7 we might say that it is like a “black swan”: a
 high-impact, extremely low-probability event that comes as a surprise. One
 such event would be the 9/11 terror attacks on the World Trade Center.
 Being a unique historical moment that shook the foundations of the Western
 world, it was also the pretext for the Bush administration to proclaim a state
 of emergency—suspending parts of the law to reduce citizens’ rights and
 extend the state’s coercive and surveillance capabilities. As with the
 discussion of the concept of confidence in chapter 4, the discussion
 concerning the exception is closely related to our understanding of the
 predictability of the world. For Schmitt’s claim to work, we must accept the
 possibility of something truly surprising, as a predictable event or action
 can, at least in theory, be assimilated by the law.
 Hans Kelsen, an influential Austrian legal philosopher, considered the
 law as a system of legal norms that cover things that might happen in the
 world. It operates in an “if-then” fashion. If you steal, then you will be
 sanctioned. This system knows a hierarchy: lower-level laws about
 particular events are subsumed under higher-level, more general laws. At
 the highest level, Kelsen hypothesized the existence of a “basic norm,”8 a
 norm that exists outside of the legal system but also stabilizes it. The actual
 law that would reify this basic norm is the constitution. All laws would
derive their validity from the basic norm, and the test of validity would be
 one of logical deduction: if a lower-level law contradicts a higher-level law,
 it is invalid. This theoretical system, known as “legal positivism,” is what
 Kelsen favored and Schmitt attacked. Schmitt believed that it tried to get rid
 of politics, creating the illusion that the application of the law is devoid of
 any genuine decision-making. Kelsen, he believed, proposed a self
regulating system, a legal machine of sorts. The sovereign “had been
 pushed aside” because now the “machine runs itself.”9
 In the summer of 2016, a less scholarly version of this debate raged on
 the Internet about the first DAO built on the Ethereum blockchain, known
 as The DAO. The DAO was intended to be an unstoppable organization, a
 machine that runs itself. It was not ruled by corporate statutes and codes but
 rather was governed by self-executing smart contracts and blockchain
 code.10 Yet, like a true digital Titanic, The DAO sank on its maiden voyage.
 The unstoppable code was exploited by an attacker, who amassed a large
 portion of the cryptocurrency stored in the smart contract. While some
 powerful actors in the Ethereum ecosystem effectively called for a state of
 emergency, others disputed the need for any intervention as the
 vulnerability was a part of the codebase. And, after all, the “code is law.”
 The central question in these debates was if the siphoning off of USD 150
 million equivalent of cryptocurrency amounted to theft and was thus an
 exceptional event that the existing codebase could not address without
 external intervention. In challenging the norm that code is law, had the
 blockchain barbarians arrived?
 The Code Runs Itself
 The DAO was a first-of-its-kind experiment in on-chain governance, which
 refers to rules and decision-making procedures that are encoded into the
 infrastructure of blockchain-based systems. An example of such a rule is the
 cap on Bitcoin quantity, which ensures that no more than 21 million
 Bitcoins will ever be created. Similarly, an on-chain decision-making
 procedure can be illustrated by Bitcoin’s PoW consensus mechanism, which
 is used to validate transactions on the blockchain. The DAO was designed
 to operate as a distributed crowdfunding platform that would replace the
arbitrary coercive power vested in traditional platform operators like
 Kickstarter with what we characterized in chapter 3 as the rule of code. Any
 of the globally distributed token holders of The DAO would be able to
 propose new projects that people could invest in, and the decisions made
 through this decentralized governance system would be executed
 “autonomously” through smart contracts.
 To envision how this might work, take the example of an apartment
 rented through a DAO that simulates the Airbnb platform. When renting a
 place on Airbnb, you need to use a centralized payment system such as
 PayPal to transfer funds to the host. Then, you must receive a physical key
 or an apartment code, which can occasionally become problematic. For
 instance, if the key isn’t handed over upon arrival, you would have to find
 alternate accommodation and possibly enter into an arbitration procedure to
 recoup any costs and damages. When operated through a DAO, you would
 instead enter into a smart contract linked to a physical “smart lock” attached
 to the property. Once you enter into an agreement through The DAO to rent
 the place, everything would happen automatically: an amount would be
 deposited from your account on a smart contract, allowing you to unlock
 the smart lock when you arrive. At the end of your stay, the deposit would
 automatically be returned to you minus the rent, and you would no longer
 be able to unlock the door.
 In fact, this type of solution was the one proposed by the developer team
 of Slock.it, the company that proposed and built The DAO. Beyond
 automating access to a property, The DAO could do much more. Using a
 combination of on- and off-chain governance tools, token holders could
 even directly make decisions that are usually taken by a board of directors,
 like how to distribute dividends from profits made through the platform. In
 short, it could potentially encompass all governance functions of a platform
 like Airbnb by means of self-executing rules of code.
 What type of “legal order” does a DAO implement, and what would
 establish the validity of a “law” in such an order? Striking similarities can
 be established between the legal positivism established by Kelsen and the
 principles underlying a DAO’s design. According to Kelsen, the validity of
 a law cannot be derived from its content. The description of “John opens the
 cash machine in the neighborhood shop, takes out $200, and runs away”
 does not by itself qualify as an act of theft. For this, one needs a norm that
forbids stealing. Conveniently, software code is both descriptive and
 performative, being able to combine a statement with a normative, deontic
 operation (e.g., allowing, forbidding, restricting). Similar to Kelsen’s test of
 validity, the validity of a transaction on a DAO is not derived from the
 transaction’s content. Instead, it is derived from the norm encoded in, for
 instance, a smart contract that determines whether a transaction can or
 cannot be made.
 But if the validity of a rule is derived from a norm, where does the
 validity of that norm itself come from? Kelsen argues that “the reason for
 the validity of a norm can only be the validity of another norm.”11 This is
 why he had to make the hypothesis of the existence of a “basic norm,” one
 that needs no further validation. It is real-world constitutions that articulate
 and represent the basic norm “by presupposing the basic norm . . . one
 ought to behave as the constitution prescribes.”12 For a DAO, the most
 basic rules are those laid down in the blockchain protocol (in the case of
 The DAO, this would be Ethereum). The blockchain protocol thereby
 expresses a higher-level basic norm that all participants tacitly presuppose.
 If blockchain-based systems like The DAO implement a legal regime
 similar to Kelsen’s characterization of a positive legal order, would they
 also be vulnerable to Schmitt’s critique? Schmitt contended that by its very
 nature, an exception cannot be legally determined in advance. Hence,
 decisions must first establish whether there indeed is an exception and,
 second, determine how to manage it. According to Schmitt, the issue is that
 legal positivism attempts to dissolve these political decisions in an
 impersonal system, like the system of parliamentarism that subjects all
 decisions to procedures that have to be followed (e.g., majority
 requirements in voting). These procedures could allow decision-making to
 dissolve into endless discussion, affecting the effectiveness of governance.
 This is fine in normal situations, which allow for lengthy negotiations
 between particular interests (e.g., child safety advocates versus gun rights
 advocates in the US). Yet, when an emergency arises—such as an
 insurrection—we don’t have the luxury of channeling decision-making
 through such a system because an urgent decision becomes necessary. And
 such a decision, Schmitt contends, is taken by a personal agency that arises
 out of the impersonal system, a latent sovereign power that cannot be cast
 aside.
Schmitt’s claim has an empirical basis. Most states have constitutional
 provisions that allow for the executive to suspend the normal legal order by
 declaring a state of emergency. Consider, for instance, the emergency
 powers enacted in France after the 2015 terrorist attacks, which, according
 to some, led to a “permanent state of emergency,” suspending the basic
 rights of certain groups.13 One historical example stands out, which was
 also the direct object of the dispute between Kelsen and Schmitt: the fall of
 the Weimar Republic in 1933. The Weimar Republic, established after
 World War One, stood out in having a progressive positivist constitution
 that sought to vest sovereign power in the parliament, the Reichstag. Yet, it
 allowed for the executive office of the president to use emergency powers
 in line with the infamous “Article 48.” This article outlined that the
 president could overrule regional governments, if needed by using the
 armed forces, and suspend basic rights. This could happen in case a regional
 government would not fulfill its duties or if public security were at stake.
 As Dyzenhaus explained, right-wing conservative forces in Germany
 coalesced to turn the country from a democracy into an authoritarian state.14
 In 1932, Article 48 was invoked on multiple occasions to dissolve the
 Reichstag, which necessitated an election that turned Adolf Hitler’s
 Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei into the largest party, and to
 incapacitate the regional social-democrat government of Prussia. Once
 Hitler had gained the office of chancellor, he used the burning down of the
 Reichstag building, allegedly caused by communist terrorists, as a pretext to
 suspend constitutional rights. Subsequently, he eliminated the communist
 faction of the Reichstag and passed the Enabling Act, which vested all
 sovereign power in the office of the chancellor, making him the de facto
 dictator of Germany. While the fall of the Weimar Republic was a product
 of political conspiracy and violence, a crucial role was played by the
 constitution itself. While it contained many safeguards (e.g., measures
 invoked under Article 48 could be revoked by the Reichstag), the
 constitution was vulnerable to the state of exception. Primarily, it is the
 sovereign that has the agency to decide on whether there is a state of
 exception to begin with—which is disputed in the case of the Reichstag fire
 in 1933. As the magistrate explains about the role of the empire’s emissary
 Colonel Joll in staving off the barbarian threat, he is there to “find out the
 truth. That is all he does.”15 This truth does not pertain to what is the case
 but to what ought to be the case.
The DAO Attack
 The DAO attack has been a pivotal event in the Ethereum community
 because it brought out a tension that goes right to the core of the underlying
 blockchain technology, namely whether its presumed immutability can or
 should prevail over human agency. Immutability, it turned out, is not an
 inherent feature of a blockchain but rather a norm underpinning its
 management and operations. This norm is similar to what Dyzenhaus
 claimed is the underlying concept of Kelsen’s legal positivism, namely “that
 no individual should be subject to the will of any other individual or group
 of individuals,”16 in the sense that the law should also not be unilaterally
 changed subject to the capricious whims of any single human agent—
 including the sovereign herself.
 What precisely occurred during The DAO attack? Let us turn to a
 chronological depiction of events. On April 30, 2016, The DAO was
 deployed on the Ethereum blockchain and a four-week crowdfunding
 period followed in which funds were raised through an ICO. Anyone could
 send Ether to The DAO and receive The DAO’s native tokens in exchange.
 During this time, the community also discussed proposals for ways that
 DAO funds might be spent.
 Well before The DAO went live, concerns were raised about potential
 vulnerabilities in the code base and its governance. A proposal was
 published on May 26 by the Slock.it team itself for updating The DAO’s
 security and appointing a security expert. Despite these concerns, at the end
 of the crowdfunding period on May 28, The DAO went live. It had amassed
 a staggering capital contribution, worth approximately USD 150 million in
 cryptocurrency. On June 5, a new technical vulnerability was discovered in
 The DAO’s code that would enable a potential attacker to repeatedly call a
 vulnerable withdrawal function and siphon assets before the smart
 contract’s balance could be updated. In light of this discovery, the Slock.it
 team started to work on an update of The DAO that would solve this
 vulnerability as well as other security issues. On June 12, the company
 released a statement stating that “no funds were at risk.” Yet, on June 17, an
 anonymous user exploited this vulnerability to drain The DAO’s funds,
 siphoning 3.6 million ETH (approximately USD 60 million at the time)
 from The DAO’s smart contract to another DAO controlled by the attacker.
Once actors in the Ethereum ecosystem became aware of this attack—
 following an alarming message posted on Reddit—they started to coalesce
 behind a closed Slack channel to discuss counterstrategies. The immediate
 step was to get the main cryptocurrency exchanges to agree to halt trading
 of The DAO native tokens. Due to a safety feature of The DAO’s smart
 contract, the funds in the new DAO were “frozen” for approximately
 twenty-seven days,17 giving the Ethereum community an opportunity to
 identify a suitable solution. On June 18, a message was posted,18 allegedly
 originating from the attacker, invoking the code-is-law mantra and claiming
 that the siphoned funds were to be regarded as a “reward” for making the
 community aware of this vulnerability.
 In the weeks following the attack, different solutions were brought
 forward by the Ethereum community. Some of these were “soft forks” that
 would not violate the protocol of the Ethereum blockchain but would rather
 instruct clients to ignore any transaction originating from the attacker’s
 DAO. Yet, these solutions were found to have serious security risks,
 because they would enable malicious users to spam the Ethereum
 blockchain. The other option was a “hard fork,” which would effectively
 violate the rules of the Ethereum protocol, making the forked chain
 backward-incompatible with the original chain. The hard fork consisted of
 forcing a transfer of funds from the attacker’s DAO to a newly created
 smart contract, whose function was only to enable the original token
 holders to withdraw their funds. This latter option was considered by many
 as the safest way to remediate the “theft” and was actively supported by
 Vitalik Buterin and other core members of the Ethereum Foundation.
 On July 20, the hard fork of the Ethereum network occurred. Most
 mining nodes adopted the new client, indicating support for the newly
 created version of Ethereum that had remediated the theft. Some, however,
 kept mining blocks for the original Ethereum blockchain, which had now
 been renamed as “Ethereum classic.” Heated discussion ensued about the
 fork’s legitimacy. Some argued that it was an unjustified violation of the
 network protocol because the attack had executed exactly as prescribed in
 the code, with no consequences for the Ethereum blockchain. Others,
 however, argued that The DAO attack had been a reality check, urging the
 community to rethink its governance in light of myriad potential smart
 contract vulnerabilities.
The debate surrounding The DAO attack, in a rudimentary way, resonates
 with similar debates occurring almost a century earlier between legal
 philosophers. First, there is the question of the state of exception. Was The
 DAO attack sufficiently disruptive for Ethereum to justify the declaration of
 a state of exception? The answer to this question should not be merely
 descriptive but also normative, including consideration of whether the
 Ethereum network had operated as it ought to. As Schmitt foresaw, this
 question cannot be answered by the system itself as it requires the exercise
 of agency by a focal point of sovereignty. Influential agents came together
 to agree on a strategy to address such an exception, before strategizing on
 tackling the exception. The majority advocating for a hard fork proactively
 proposed a way to handle the exception. Given its lack of backward
 compatibility, the hard fork is comparable to a constitutional change that
 establishes a new constitution. Yet, a radical departure from the classical
 debate on the state of exception is the fact that the fork led to the
 establishment of two alternative versions of the Ethereum blockchain. This
 would be similar to supporters of the original Weimar constitution having
 maintained their own republic despite Hitler’s separate regime of terror. In
 the physical world, however, this is simply not an option.
 Taming the Specter of Private Interests
 In the case of a “normal” hard fork, a standardized procedure is followed
 that relies on a formalized off-chain proposal process with checks and
 balances. Even if imperfect, this workflow is in line with legal positivism’s
 ideal that no individual or group of individuals can arbitrarily force their
 decision upon the network. The hard fork in the aftermath of The DAO
 attack, however, was unplanned and could not—due to the urgency of the
 exception—follow normal procedures. While nodes still could not be
 coerced into joining one chain over another, they were confronted with a
 narrow range of choices to choose from and high economic stakes resting
 on their choice. It thus revealed the existence of a latent network sovereign,
 a focal point of agency distributed among a few influential individuals and
 groups, who effectively limited the choices available. Ultimately, what The
 DAO attack has shown is that blockchain systems are also vulnerable to
 what Schmitt described as the “coalescence of private interests.”
Speaking of liberal democracies, Schmitt argued that the “machine that
 runs itself” (i.e., the positivist legal order) is concerned more with the
 validity of laws, including those that establish a community’s shared values,
 than with the substance of those laws. For instance, such an order lays down
 formal requirements for a proposal to be issued, the voting mechanism to
 approve proposals, and thresholds for a proposal to pass. In a liberal,
 pluralist society, any value is as worthy of being considered as any other; a
 shared conception of the common good is absent. One can hold the opinion
 to want to abolish public education, spend all public funds on combating
 climate change, or even abolish democracy as long as this opinion is
 directed through the proper procedural channels and the laws enacting these
 views are valid. Thus, Schmitt argued that even though the system does lay
 down a basis for formal legality, it fails to provide a ground for substantive
 legitimacy—as an additional justification of its own rules. The legal order
 can distinguish between valid and invalid rules and decision-making
 procedures but not between “right” and “wrong” that derive from a
 substantive understanding of the common good.
 For this reason, the only way that the legal order in a liberal democracy
 can produce a common good is through negotiations and discussions
 between private parties and the state, which is subsequently enacted through
 legal procedures. Private interests have to coalesce to gain power in this
 negotiation, in configurations ranging from foundations to lobby groups. A
 blockchain network faces the same fundamental challenge. Whenever
 questions arise that go beyond mere technicalities and involve some notion
 of the common good, private interests may come together, creating a focal
 point of sovereignty that in extreme situations might even undo the integrity
 of the blockchain itself. Hence, despite its claim to immutability, blockchain
 technology cannot fundamentally ignore the role that governance,
 particularly off-chain governance, plays in its operations. To avoid potential
 abuses resulting from the coalescence of invisible powers, blockchain
 communities would do well to recognize the role of off-chain governance as
 a complementary and powerful force and ideally put in place specific
 mechanisms for constraining governance.
 One possible change would be a new procedural mechanism. This means
 establishing a formalized governance process for handling exceptions, as
 exists in traditional political orders and constitutions. The implications of
establishing such a procedural solution can be illustrated with reference to
 the event known as the “Parity bug.”
 The Parity bug was a vulnerability in the library smart contract code of
 Parity multisig wallets (i.e., wallets that require multiple signatures to
 authorize transactions). In November 2017, an anonymous attacker
 exploited this vulnerability to gain control over the library smart contract
 with the sole purpose of destroying it by calling the self-destruct function.
 All multisig wallets that depended on this library thus became inoperative,
 resulting in the freezing of more than USD 150 million worth of Ether at
 the time. The incident significantly impacted Ethereum governance as it
 highlighted the importance of code audits and security measures in
 blockchain technology. It also led to a debate within the Ethereum
 community about the best way to handle such incidents and whether or not
 it would make sense to again intervene by means of a hard fork to bring the
 smart contract library back to life, thereby enabling the frozen funds to be
 returned to their rightful owners. Ultimately, in contrast to the decision
 taken in the aftermath of The DAO attack, the Ethereum community
 decided not to implement a hard fork, thus preventing anyone from
 retrieving the frozen funds.
 The reasons for this decision are multifaceted. First, the actual amount of
 Ether involved in the Parity incident was much lower than in The DAO
 attack (500,000 ETH versus 3.6 million ETH). Second, while a decision on
 The DAO attack had to be taken within a short time frame, the community
 had a longer time frame to consider their approach to the Parity bug. Third,
 and perhaps most importantly, the Parity bug didn’t affect Ethereum overall
 but was a more isolated security failure regarding a particular smart
 contract. But who is to decide on the severity of a network crisis? Who has
 the power to decide whether the execution of a smart contract, albeit
 perfectly compliant with the rule of code, should be reverted in the name of
 rule of law concepts like theft or protection of private property?
 A more robust, formalized, and transparent governance system appears to
 be desirable as it could specify an appropriate mechanism for deciding and
 resolving exceptions. A range of governance approaches could be adopted,
 from preserving the informal status quo to implementing forms of
 delegation. In the latter, a community agrees on the rules and constraints
 that establish an “emergency regime.” This assigns a narrow set of powers
to a predefined group of delegates to frame approaches to resolving an
 exception, which network actors will then consider and implement.19
 However, formalizing such a procedure comes with problems if not
 approached carefully. For instance, if the Ethereum community were to
 establish a particular regime for fund recovery, assigning broad powers to a
 predefined group of delegates over whether or not to reverse a transaction,
 this would mean officially giving up on the immutability guarantees of the
 Ethereum blockchain. While these powers could be formally limited in
 terms of time (e.g., emergency decision-making powers for a defined
 period, extended by majority vote of community) and scope (e.g., excluding
 particular types of decisions), this would only tame but not prevent the
 emergence of a new latent sovereign power in a system that was precisely
 designed to be devoid of any sovereign. It would also involve abandoning
 commitments to decentralization since such a mechanism would, by design,
 involve coercing other network actors.
 It is for this reason that several blockchain communities have begun
 adopting off-chain governance mechanisms that are substantive in nature,
 most notably drafting “constitutions” and “codes of ethics” to articulate
 shared values that they agree to be bound by even in the absence of
 coercion. A commitment to features like decentralization and ethical
 approaches like “inclusiveness” not only help cultivate “civic values” but
 also involve substantive processes that require moving beyond preserving
 the positivist legal order encoded in a blockchain protocol or DAO.
 * * *
 Departing from a discussion of blockchain as a code-based legal order that
 “runs itself,” this chapter turned to legal theory to expose the challenges
 raised by states of exception in blockchain-based systems. It outlined the
 scholarship on sovereignty and the state of exception, focusing on the
 works of Kelsen and Schmitt. It continued with an exposition of The DAO
 attack, elaborating on the events and actors involved in this state of
 exception. Blockchain technology—despite its promises—does not
 eliminate all risks of centralization through coalescence of private interests,
 meaning that the specter of the exception remains. The next chapters will
 delve deeper into the kind of legal order generated by blockchain
technology, questioning the extent to which it is alegal and how it may
 produce both legal and legitimate forms of governance.
 OceanofPDF.com
6
 Alegality
 Every command slaps liberty in the face.
 Pax Bitcoinica
 —Mikhail Bakunin, Oeuvres1
 What would it be like to live in a libertarian utopia? Imagine you are a
 digital nomad, living in what Balaji Srinivasan calls the network state of
 Bitcoinica. You wake up in an apartment belonging to Bitcoinica and decide
 to fly to another property owned by this network state in the city of Berlin.
 At the airport, you identify yourself to the authorities with your Bitcoinica
 passport, which uses zero-knowledge proofs to verify your Bitcoinica
 citizenship without requiring you to reveal other personal details. You then
 travel to the Bitcoinica makers’ hub in the neighborhood of Kreuzberg,
 where you make payments to a Bitcoinica smart contract to reserve desk
 space and buy coffee. At your desk, you use your private key to enter the
 Bitcoinica metaverse, where you can work and unwind with Bitcoinica
 citizens from all over the world.
 In the summer of 2022, the former chief technology officer of Coinbase,
 Balaji Srinivasan, captured this futuristic idea in a manifesto. Srinivasan
 argues that we find ourselves in a pivotal moment, in which humankind
 should shed the nation state in favor of the network state.2 There are several
 prerequisites for the formation of his network state. A network state needs a
 social network, a moral proposition that defines its purpose, a recognized
 founder, a virtual capital, its own cryptocurrency, and a real-time census of
 the population and accounting of its assets. Additionally, it needs encryption
 and a blockchain network for the state’s administrative infrastructure. It also
 requires a national consciousness among citizens, the ability to act
 collectively, a high degree of civility within the network, and the consensual
 conferral of a limited, withdrawable set of privileges assigned to the
governors in exchange for admission to the state. The last, but potentially
 most significant feature, falls within the domain of international law: the
 diplomatic recognition of the network state by other existing states.
 Srinivasan’s audacious call for an online community to bootstrap an
 entire state could be dismissed as a form of speculative fiction. Yet, the new
 political imaginary it invokes is only possible due to the substrate provided
 by blockchain networks. The intuition is that if the creation and circulation
 of Bitcoin can wrest control over monetary and financial policy, then “self
sovereignty” in other domains could also be attainable—including the
 eventual creation of entirely new states. That he considers Bitcoin to be a
 type of global sovereign is clear from his coining of the term Pax Bitcoinica
 to describe how Bitcoin, through its very existence, becomes a government
 of governments, as it “sits above every state and constrains it from printing
 infinite quantities of money, from lawlessly seizing the funds of its citizens,
 and from waging forever war. In doing so, it limits that which will never
 limit itself.”3 Bitcoin, in other words, is above the law and can never be
 brought within its fold: it is alegal.
 The Notion of Alegality
 In 2014, Gavin Wood delivered a presentation on the concept of alegality.
 After having asked the audience what they understood by the term, he
 explained that it was “something which just doesn’t care . . . cannot care . . .
 as to whether its actions might be interpreted as legal or might be
 interpreted as illegal.”4 As public blockchain networks do not have a
 centralized operator or a CEO, they cannot be shut down through take
down requests or forms of litigation. It is too costly to sanction hundreds, if
 not thousands, of geographically dispersed and pseudonymous users. For
 Wood, each of these systems are therefore like an unregulatable “force of
 nature”: actions taken through blockchain systems would subsist outside of
 any legal order and thereby provoke a change in what is deemed to be
 illegal. On the one hand, the use of these distributed systems would make it
 easier to enforce certain existing laws (e.g., AML regulations, if financial
 transactions were executed on-chain). On the other hand, it would make it
 harder to prevent mutually beneficial agreements that are freely agreed
upon. As a consequence, Wood predicted that blockchain would force us to
 rethink our existing legal system.
 In the years since Wood’s talk, the term “alegal” has quietly been adopted
 by crypto enthusiasts and interpreted in different ways. It has been used to
 explain the ambiguous or silent position of states to the legality of Bitcoin
 as well as to contend that alegality can be leveraged to achieve political
 objectives. Most significantly, the concept of alegality inspired the creation
 of The DAO a few years down the line.5
 As Wood readily concedes, he was not the first to coin the term alegality
 or develop it conceptually. Legal scholars have developed the concept of
 alegality to argue how an act can be irreducible to the legal/illegal binary
 that is maintained by the state apparatus. Hamzić describes this as the
 capacity to “exist and act in the interstices, or perhaps beyond or outside,
 the dominant modes of . . . legal production.”6 For Lindahl, the scholar who
 has written most extensively on this concept, alegality denotes a
 “strangeness,”7 which contributes to alegal acts being unintelligible to the
 law. While Lindahl primarily had human actions and behavior in mind
 when elaborating on the concept of alegality, Wood raised the question of
 whether systems like open blockchain architectures can also be alegal.
 To better appreciate this line of thinking, it is necessary to understand
 what Lindahl means by legal order. He defines legal orders as
 “institutionalised and authoritatively mediated collective action.”8 This
 means that collective action is regulated by certain authorities on behalf of
 citizens through the framing and enforcement of rules. Most citizens are
 therefore expected to agree to a common set of rules as well as the
 authorities responsible for regulating collective action, irrespective of the
 identity of any particular individuals who hold official positions within
 these authorities.
 According to Lindahl, legal orders possess temporal, spatial, material,
 and subjective boundaries that establish the distinction between legality and
 illegality.9 While ordinary legal and illegal acts can readily be
 circumscribed within this binary, alegal acts test these boundaries and, on
 occasion, trigger changes of these boundaries. In other words, legal and
 illegal acts reinforce existing legal boundaries, while alegal acts open the
 possibility of innumerable alternative legalities.
Laws are temporally bounded in the sense that they specify when acts can
 be done and when they cannot. This is most clearly seen in the general legal
 principle that laws should only apply prospectively, not retrospectively.
 Relatedly, despite laws striving to be “future proof,” in reality they cannot
 account for all possible future acts and developments. Thus, an alegal act
 that would breach the temporal boundary of the law would be one that
 initiates something new and unprecedented in that legal order—such as the
 creation of Bitcoin or the founding and recognition of Bitcoinica as a
 network state.
 The spatial boundaries of the law demarcate the physical territories where
 acts can and cannot be carried out. These territories may be contiguous to
 the territorial boundaries of a nation state or may be archipelagos
 distributed across the globe, subject to the authority of a multinational
 corporation.10 Even cyberspace is physically embedded, with e-commerce
 platforms relying on physical places like warehouses, the seller’s point of
 shipment, and the buyer’s home. Alegal acts that transgress spatial
 boundaries are those that question where it is legal or illegal for an act to
 occur. Asylum seekers—some of whom will be granted refugee status and
 others who will be deported—tangibly test these spatial boundaries with
 every crossing, as they raise political questions about whether this act of
 crossing should be legal or illegal.
 Material boundaries of the law circumscribe what acts can be carried out
 in a certain time and place and are usually articulated as sets of rights and
 obligations.11 The various peoples’ tribunals charging leaders (e.g., Putin)
 and states (e.g., Myanmar) with international crimes do not have formal,
 state-backed jurisdiction to try such crimes, but they give visibility to rights
 violations that are ignored by national and international justice systems due
 to procedural reasons or geopolitical considerations. The deliberations and
 verdicts of these tribunals may be alegal, but they shape public opinion and
 make it possible to envision the operation of a different judicial system, one
 with alternative conceptions of justice.12
 Finally, the law’s subjective boundaries set whose acts can be permitted
 or sanctioned. A citizen is the most obvious example of someone who can
 be subject to a legal order, but even the nature of their status may differ
 based on their residence or criminal record. If a citizen is resident outside of
 their home country or possesses a criminal record, they may be excluded
from certain rights of citizenship, like standing in a national election for an
 official post. These subjective boundaries can be challenged by an alegal act
 that questions existing prohibitions or restrictions on who can act in a given
 context, with the intention of changing the terms of these prohibitions or
 restrictions. The storied legacy of brave slaves who participated in the
 slavery abolition movement—at great risk to their own lives—is a powerful
 example of people taking actions to have their personality and subjecthood
 recognized by an existing legal order.
 Alegal acts not only test boundaries but also affirm the role of boundaries
 as limits of a legal order, limits between the “collective self and other-than
self.”13 In the case of a limit, legislative action or, in certain limited ways,
 courts can redraw the boundaries of a legal order to domesticate the alegal
 act. But in some situations, legal reform or judicial interpretation are not
 enough. In these instances, the boundaries of legal orders instead appear to
 be fault lines, which means that trying to domesticate the alegal act would
 threaten the core identity of the legal order.14 We can think of coexisting
 and parallel civil and personal law regimes as an example of this, where
 changes to the status quo would require choosing between two norm-based
 systems that are deemed to be equally legitimate. As with many countries,
 India has laws derived from its various religious communities governing
 issues such as marriage and property inheritance, but there have long been
 debates about replacing this complex patchwork of personal laws with a
 uniform civil code that would provide a common set of rules on these
 matters. Considering such legislation—not to mention actually passing it
 into law—appears as a fault line as it puts into question the identity of the
 legal order itself.
 Boundary transgression occurs through three broad categories of alegal
 acts. First, there are acts that are alegal in Wood’s sense in that they are
 practically not possible to include within a legal order, for example, the
 biological process of thinking. Second, there are alegal acts that are
 intelligible to a legal order and can be addressed through legal reform to
 adjust the law’s boundaries. For instance, copyright law reform can tackle
 digital piracy. Third, there are alegal acts that create fault lines because they
 are unintelligible to an existing legal order; attempting to incorporating
 them would require a wholesale overhaul of both the law’s boundaries and
norms. Blockchain systems provide an illuminating example of the latter
 two categories, which will be discussed more fully in the next section.
 Destructive Golems
 To what extent do blockchain networks facilitate alegal acts that create fault
 lines? Initially, the answer seems to be that blockchain networks are not
 alegal in this sense if we consider the actions of some powerful actors in
 blockchain networks. Intermediaries, like centralized cryptocurrency
 exchanges, have been subject to significant legal and regulatory action. This
 is 
partly because these intermediaries, operated by corporations and
 executives, can readily be brought within a state’s jurisdiction (e.g., through
 injunctions, arrests), and partly because they engage in activities that are
 already governed by the law (e.g., money transmitter regulations). Their
 actions can therefore more readily be classified as being legal or illegal, as
 can be seen in the spate of litigation against various crypto exchanges over
 the years, from Mt. Gox to FTX.
 Similarly, ICOs and other broad-based fundraising schemes have long
 been a feature of blockchain networks. These ICOs have typically been
 organized by a centralized entity and involve activities that are analogous to
 fundraising schemes of the past. Thus, when allegations of securities fraud
 or other criminal acts arise, it is trivial to frame charges and pursue legal
 action against them. The application of the long-standing Howey test in the
 United States—derived from a case concerning whether the sale of interests
 in an orange grove amounted to an investment contract—to contemporary
 token offerings, to ascertain if they are investment contracts and thus
 unregistered securities, indicates that regulators and courts can pierce
 through the technical and financial complexities of a case to grasp the
 economic realities of a transaction. In other words, merely using new
 packaging for an investment does not qualify it as being an alegal act, as
 legal interpretation can be used to reinforce the law’s boundaries.
 Even more elaborate crypto businesses, like Celsius Network, which pays
 interest to users who deposit cryptocurrencies with them, fail to be alegal in
 this third, stricter sense as they have centralized operators. These operators
 can be charged with crimes that can be committed in a wide and open
this, 
ended variety of ways. For instance, in 2022, Celsius Network’s operator
 was charged with grossly mismanaging funds and fraud for artificially
 setting the price of its native token and not managing risk properly. Because
 of 
users have not been able to withdraw their deposited
 cryptocurrencies but, as of November 2023, a reorganization plan has been
 confirmed by the US Southern District of New York Bankruptcy Court
 pursuant to which account holders will (according to Celsius) eventually
 receive about USD 2 billion. Some of the allegations made about businesses
 like Celsius Network and FTX include activities already regulated by well
established bodies of law. While illegal acts can, in some instances, be
 alegal if they strive to change the boundaries of a legal order, this intention
 is not present in many of these cases. In short, many of the activities
 popularly associated with the running of a blockchain-based system, from
 initiating an ICO to operating a crypto exchange, do not create fault lines.
 Yet, when focusing on the core design of blockchain networks, the claim
 to alegality becomes more credible. Take, for instance, the transparency and
 tamper-resistant qualities of blockchain protocols. Because of these
 features, it is exponentially difficult for content to be removed from a
 widely used public permissionless blockchain regardless of whether that
 content is harmful (e.g., child pornography), questionable (e.g., pirated
 content), or considered publicly beneficial (e.g., on-chain financial
 transactions of sanctioned Russian oligarchs). More importantly, blockchain
 transparency and tamper-resistance can transform how issues like financial
 transparency are regulated altogether. Imagine, for instance, legal
 authorities using blockchain analytics to trace the transfer of crypto assets
 that they suspect of being used for criminal purposes and thereby enforcing
 a new regime of financial transparency, such as the one introduced in the
 EU through the Transfer of Funds Regulation in 2023. Whether desirable or
 not, this resonates with what Wood meant by the alegal nature of blockchain
 systems prompting the reimagination of how illegal activities are regulated.
 Blockchain technology thereby prompts us to test the material boundaries
 of the law and can prompt a reconfiguration of how rights and obligations
 are distributed in a legal order.
 Blockchain also challenges the law’s subjective boundaries. Consider the
 novel “property regime” of crypto assets. In traditional property regimes,
 ownership titles are defined and granted by the law, with the state acting to
 enforce those laws should a false claim be made about ownership. Physical
possession, while important, is not the be-all and end-all of determining
 who has legal ownership. In contrast, the novel property regime in
 blockchain systems is captured by the aphorism “not your keys, not your
 coins.” It is possession of one’s private key associated with a crypto wallet
 that makes one technically the owner of the cryptocurrency in that wallet, as
 it allows one to exercise the rights typically associated with full ownership,
 such as access, transfer, and use. As the FTX debacle revealed, ownership
 of a crypto asset does not necessarily lead to the enjoyment of ownership
 rights. FTX held many users’ crypto assets in FTX wallets, and when the
 exchange went under, many users lost access to their crypto holdings. It
 became unclear for many whether they would be able to regain control over
 their crypto assets. After all, there is no guarantee that a court will enforce
 legal ownership. For instance, a 2020 case in California involved a claim by
 a user alleging that financial gains from the forking of their crypto assets
 were not passed on to them by their crypto custodian. This claim was not
 upheld by the court as the custodian held the tokens, and the contractual
 agreement between the user and the custodian gave the latter discretion in
 passing on financial gains from forked assets.15 While legal and technical
 ownership remain in tension, judgments such as these seek to encompass
 transgressive legal acts within the law’s boundaries.
 Moreover, blockchain challenges the spatial boundaries of the law. As
 The DAO (see chapter 5) was not controlled by a centralized operator and
 was not registered in any state, it existed simultaneously everywhere and
 nowhere. In this respect, blockchain-based systems differ from traditional
 entities that depend on registration in, or at least recognition by, a territorial
 jurisdiction. Even in this age of ubiquitous multinational corporations, this
 connection between an entity and a territory determines an entity’s capacity
 to interact with the physical world. The recognition of the separate legal
 personality of unregistered DAOs without requiring registration in a state
 would amount to a redrawing of the law’s spatial boundaries and require
 significant political and administrative changes.
 The DAO Model Law developed by the Coalition of Automated Legal
 Applications (COALA) calls for this approach, asking jurisdictions to
 eschew local registration requirements and instead recognize alternative
 functionally and regulatorily equivalent means for achieving the policy
 objectives of registration. Whether such a deterritorial approach is adopted
 remains to be seen. The state of Utah’s DAO Act, based on The DAO
Model Law, does waive registration requirements and recognizes
 unregistered DAOs meeting certain conditions as equivalent to domestic
 LLCs. However, it maintains a physical link to the jurisdiction by requiring
 that a registered agent be physically present in the state of Utah.
 Finally, blockchain challenges the law’s temporal boundaries. Consider
 the decision to pursue a hard fork of the underlying Ethereum protocol in
 the wake of the attack on The DAO. While the retroactive unwinding of
 undesirable past transactions at a set point in time addressed the concerns of
 those who considered The DAO attack to be a form of theft, others believed
 this act infringed the code-is-law approach. This act was alegal as it raised
 fundamental questions about the sequence of how and when acts are
 appropriately done. It just so happens that the coordinated action to hard
 fork led to an outcome that made victims of theft whole. In several
 subsequent hacks of blockchain protocols, such coordination did not occur,
 and the law could not command a hard fork to occur either.
 These examples show how the design of blockchain networks enables
 them to resist the force of legal orders in certain ways and even prompt the
 redrawing of legal boundaries. Despite its limitations, Wood’s claim
 regarding the alegality of blockchain technology raised an interesting
 question: can blockchain systems be alegal by design? To some extent, this
 seems to be the case. While most scholars of alegality have limited the
 concept to purely political actions, it seems that systems like blockchain do
 have politics, as Winner famously argued.16 By mediating human action, a
 blockchain can allow actors to transgress the boundaries of the law, thereby
 leveraging design to enable alegality.17 Yet, despite this capacity, and
 contrary to Wood’s claim, it is far from the case that blockchain networks
 do not or cannot care about traditional legal orders. Indeed, even
 blockchain-based systems specifically designed to enable alegal acts are
 invariably entangled with state legal orders.
 Can blockchain systems be alegal by design? To some extent, this
 seems to be the case.
 One example of this is Tornado Cash, a blockchain-based software
 system used to enhance financial privacy. Users can send cryptocurrency to
 Tornado Cash smart contracts from one address and then withdraw it to
another, thereby severing the link between the two addresses, obfuscating
 the holder’s identity, and retaining control of the cryptocurrency. This
 service can be used for both legitimate and illegitimate purposes, ranging
 from anonymous charitable donations to the funding of hackers. What
 makes Tornado Cash distinct is that it is a collection of smart contracts on
 the Ethereum blockchain without a centralized operator that can stop or
 intervene in its operations. This was a deliberate choice by the founding
 team of developers, as they wished to preserve the immutability of the
 smart contracts and enable Tornado Cash to be trustless and autonomous—a
 true confidence machine—thereby upholding the “precepts that code is
 law.”18
 The technological affordances of Tornado Cash allow it to perform alegal
 acts that transgress all four boundaries of the law. Since its deployment, it
 has challenged the temporal boundary of the law by a novel, more
 censorship-resistant system of preserving financial privacy. Simultaneously,
 this system challenges the law’s material boundaries by strengthening the
 right to financial privacy at a time when it is threatened. By concealing the
 origins of financial transactions, Tornado Cash enables individuals to
 perform otherwise unfeasible transactions, such as making outward
 remittances in jurisdictions with strict foreign payments restrictions, thereby
 challenging the law’s authority on who may or may not take certain
 financial actions. Finally, as with unregistered DAOs, since Tornado Cash is
 a collection of smart contracts that exist everywhere and nowhere, it
 transgresses the spatial boundaries of the law by challenging any state’s
 ability to claim jurisdiction over it.
 At least this is what appeared to be the case. On August 8, 2022, and
 November 8, 2022, the US Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control
 (OFAC) sanctioned Tornado Cash for facilitating a North Korean hacker
 group to launder proceeds from their activities. As a result of these
 sanctions, it became unlawful for any US citizen, resident, or company to
 conduct transactions with the smart contract addresses linked to this
 blockchain-based service, which held more than USD 400 million worth of
 Ether at the time. While OFAC claimed that this sanction targets the
 Tornado Cash “entity,” comprised of its founders, developers, and DAO, at
 the time it appeared to target a list of smart contract addresses. This means
 that no one, including the development team, has control over its
 operations, and therefore there is no way to modify or shut it down. Can
code be sanctioned? Following the sanction order, centralized GitHub
 repositories were removed, the Tornado Cash DAO went dark, and a
 developer was arrested in the Netherlands. However, the Tornado Cash
 smart contract addresses continue to autonomously process transactions that
 are sent to it. As a result, these sanctions were heavily criticized, especially
 within the blockchain community, as they effectively apply to a
 technological artifact rather than to a legal entity.19
 On the one hand, the example of Tornado Cash shows how legal
 boundaries can become fault lines. What some claim as being a sanction
 that targets a group of persons, others perceive as being a sanction of
 autonomous code. Thus, the sanction could potentially fall foul of existing
 liberal approaches to regulating software code as speech, which is protected
 by the constitutional right to freedom of speech in the United States.20 To
 address this fault line, some have called for fundamental and drastic change.
 For Farrell and Schneier, the Tornado Cash imbroglio necessitates a
 revisiting of the long-established doctrine of considering code as speech.
 Tornado Cash, they argue, is a “destructive Golem” (referring to the
 mythical artificial creature in Jewish folklore created from inanimate
 matter). This Golem can exist and mix transactions for as long as the
 Ethereum blockchain exists, leaving a long trail of broken laws and
 regulations in its wake.21 In their view, only some code is speech, and
 speech that collapses speech and action in the manner that a DAO does
 should not be protected as speech.
 On the other hand, the sanction notices demonstrate the limits of
 alegality. It is true that the law cannot directly alter code on the blockchain.
 Yet, it is clear that sanctions can indirectly regulate the persons who interact
 with sanctioned addresses. In the case of Tornado Cash, these targets of
 regulation include the block producers who process network transactions as
 well as cryptocurrency exchanges. Soon after the sanction notices were
 announced, more than 50 percent of Ethereum block producers were, by
 default, censoring transactions that originated from Tornado Cash
 irrespective of whether they were legally subject to the sanction.
 In contrast to Srinivasan’s vision of blockchain-based systems acting as a
 government of governments beyond the reach of any legal order,
 technologies that are alegal by design like Tornado Cash show that such
 systems are entangled with state legal orders in complex ways. While legal
orders can imprison developers, frighten validators and cryptocurrency
 exchanges, and stifle the development of privacy-enhancing technologies,
 the Tornado Cash smart contracts themselves continue to function. While
 some hope that sanctions and regulation will disable this autonomous
 Golem, it is unclear how these will be enforced, and it is uncertain that all
 stakeholders will otherwise voluntarily comply. If these systems continue to
 progressively become more decentralized and diverse, it will become harder
 to imprison the Golem. As a case in point, after months of most block
 producers censoring transactions emanating from Tornado Cash, by April
 2023, the majority of them could use non-US software—clients and relayers
 —to process these transactions despite the OFAC sanctions remaining in
 place.
 * * *
 Drawing on legal theories concerning alegality, chapter 6 explored how the
 design of blockchain technologies enables them to resist the force of legal
 orders, transgress legal boundaries, and even redraw them. For techno
optimists, the alegal nature of blockchain technologies is worth preserving
 as it allows certain freedoms and rights to be extended, such as the right to
 financial privacy. Blockchain alegality seemingly offers a way to be free
 from legal commands that—as the anarchist Bakunin put it—“slap liberty
 in the face.”22 A more pessimistic view is that without sweeping regulation
 and reform, autonomous systems will devolve into destructive Golems that
 cause widespread social harm. Given the limits of what the law can
 unilaterally achieve in the context of blockchain networks—and the crises
 blockchain networks routinely experience—the following chapter shows
 how the need to cultivate perceptions of legitimacy can motivate actions
 that are in the community and public interest.
 OceanofPDF.com
7
 Legitimacy
 The most important scarce resource is legitimacy.
 —Vitalik Buterin, “The Most Important Scarce Resource Is Legitimacy”1
 Polycrisis
 In 2022, as Russia launched its war on Ukraine and the global economy
 experienced the aftershocks of the COVID-19 pandemic, the world of
 crypto also experienced a “polycrisis.” After some major stablecoins
 collapsed, the NFT market crashed and the market cap of most public
 blockchains dropped dramatically. The biggest shock would come with the
 downfall of the crypto wunderkind Sam Bankman-Fried and his FTX
 empire. Enter the crypto winter.
 In these precarious times, the legitimacy of current governance practices
 come into question, testing confidence in existing institutional
 arrangements. The crypto winter has also raised questions about legitimate
 governance in the blockchain space. The debate on this topic was already
 initiated in 2021, at the height of the crypto boom, by Ethereum founder
 Vitalik Buterin. On his personal blog, Buterin argued that blockchain
 proponents had overlooked a very important factor in governance: the
 pattern of higher-order acceptance that he called legitimacy.2
 What Buterin argued is that as technically sophisticated as a blockchain
 system might be, it still requires a certain degree of acceptance to function
 at all. Buterin claimed that legitimacy can derive from various sources
 depending on context—including brute force, continuity, fairness, process,
 performance, and participation. Yet, he noted that the legitimacy of
 blockchain-based systems was particularly dependent on higher-order
 acceptance by all network participants of the outcomes of the system, which
 he argued was mainly built around the expectation that others will also
 accept these outcomes as being legitimate.
In seeking to define legitimacy, Buterin unwittingly entered into
 conversation with the many scholars who have theorized legitimacy, the
 German sociologist Max Weber being the most notable one.
 Legitimacy and Legality
 Weber considered legitimacy to be the acceptance of authority and the
 requirement to obey commands. He developed a conception of legitimacy
 that was concerned more with how a political system designs rules and
 delegates power in line with these rules than with what these rules
 substantively say. The legitimacy of a political system arose from people
 being accustomed to its practices and mores (i.e., tradition), their trust in the
 exceptional qualities of a leader (i.e., charisma), or their confidence in a
 rational set of rules and norms being followed (i.e., legality). In this sense,
 legitimacy derived from legality depends on conformity with procedural
 rules and “technological choices, not ideological ones.”3 Any value or
 principle that has been embodied in law can be regarded as legitimate.
 For other scholars, like Dyzenhaus, legitimacy and legality are
 intertwined concepts, but the existence of the latter does not necessarily
 entail the existence of the former.4 From this perspective, the existence of
 legitimacy requires more than legality as it implies that people also accept
 the rules established through law. Habermas and Heller, for instance, argue
 that the legitimacy of the law is derived from the fact that it is
 democratically produced.5 In traditional democracies, the acceptance of
 rules and authorities often stems from free and fair elections. When citizens
 participate in elections and choose their representatives, they are more
 likely to accept the decisions and laws passed by those representatives as
 they have contributed to the selection process and can hold their officials
 accountable. However, democratic accountability alone is insufficient.
 Acceptance also requires a well-functioning judicial system that upholds the
 rule of law. When people believe that laws are applied consistently and
 fairly, without favoring those with high status or power, they are more
 likely to accept and respect those laws. Transparency also plays an
 important role in building acceptance. When government actions and
 decision-making processes are open and accessible to the public, it fosters
trust and accountability in the governance process, thus increasing the
 likelihood that its outcomes will be accepted.
 As a consequence of this distinction, an action or a governance system
 can be perceived as legitimate—at least by a segment of the population—
 even when it is explicitly unlawful. Consider the case of exchanging
 copyrighted content over the Internet, which some may view as legitimate
 despite its illegality. The same holds true in the context of blockchain-based
 systems; many activities there are regarded as legitimate even if they violate
 the protocol’s rules. For instance, a hard fork can be considered legitimate
 because it allows for the possibility of innovation and evolution within a
 particular blockchain ecosystem. Essentially, forking is a way for a
 blockchain community to decide (i.e., to vote) on how the blockchain
 should be upgraded and what direction it should take. Hence, even if the
 resulting network does not adhere to the original protocol, it can still be
 perceived as legitimate because it represents the community’s will. Of
 course, as The DAO attack (chapter 5) has shown, not everyone might agree
 that a fork is legitimate, particularly those who equate legitimacy with
 legality and consider that such an action is an unlawful demonstration of
 political power. Contentious forks might thus result in the emergence of two
 separate networks (e.g., Ethereum versus Ethereum Classic) that compete
 with each other to acquire the highest level of legitimacy and therefore
 adoption.
 When government actions and decision-making processes are
 open and accessible to the public, it fosters trust and
 accountability in the governance process, thus increasing the
 likelihood that its outcomes will be accepted.
 Another interesting example that illustrates the potential disparities
 between legality and legitimacy in the blockchain space is the case of MEV,
 which refers to the total value that can be extracted from a set of
 transactions in a blockchain network. MEV arises due to the presence of
 various economic incentives and opportunities that can be exploited by
 miners and validators in the network. It can become a significant challenge
 in public, permissionless blockchain networks like Ethereum, where
 multiple actors with varying degrees of power and autonomy interact. These
include miners, validators, searchers, and users—each with their own goals
 and incentives. If these actors compete with each other to extract MEV, this
 can lead to suboptimal outcomes for the network as a whole. For instance, a
 block producer may prioritize certain transactions over others based on their
 potential for MEV. While this is consistent with the rules of the underlying
 blockchain protocol, it can create a sense of unfairness for those who
 submitted transactions that were deprioritized. Additionally, the pursuit of
 MEV can incentivize block producers to engage in activities that may
 undermine the network’s overall security, such as reordering transactions to
 maximize their gains.
 The legality of MEV practices is generally clear—at least within the legal
 orders of blockchain systems—as they operate within their established rules
 and protocols. However, its legitimacy is a subject of ongoing debate and
 controversy.6 Many within the Ethereum community question whether the
 pursuit of MEV aligns with the broader principles of fairness,
 decentralization, and security that the technology seeks to uphold. This
 debate underscores the nuanced nature of legitimacy in the blockchain
 space, where practices that may be legally permissible can still face scrutiny
 and ethical considerations from a legitimacy standpoint.
 To address these challenges, various solutions have been proposed among
 the Ethereum ecosystem, including implementing MEV-focused protocols
 such as Flashbots and adopting gas auction systems that allow users to bid
 for priority in transaction processing.7 However, these solutions are still in
 development, and the governance of MEV remains a significant challenge
 in blockchain networks.
 Different Shades of Legitimacy
 In the context of blockchain systems, distinguishing between endogenous
 and exogenous legitimacy is essential for understanding how these
 networks are adopted. Endogenous legitimacy refers to legitimacy that
 arises from within the blockchain ecosystem itself. It is based on the
 network’s internal mechanisms, consensus protocols, and adherence to
 predefined rules and governance structures. When participants within the
 blockchain community collectively agree on the network’s governing rules
and processes and have confidence in its security and reliability,
 endogenous legitimacy is established.
 Conversely, exogenous legitimacy pertains to legitimacy that arises from
 interactions with actors outside the blockchain ecosystem. This form of
 legitimacy is often influenced by external factors, such as the need for
 regulatory compliance and legal recognition by traditional institutions.
 Exogenous legitimacy can be vital for bridging the gap between blockchain
 technology and broader socioeconomic and legal systems. When blockchain
 projects work within established legal frameworks, obtain regulatory
 approvals, and collaborate with recognized institutions, they can enhance
 their exogenous legitimacy, which can in turn boost confidence and
 adoption among a wider audience. At the same time, if the blockchain
 community were to compromise on the ecosystem’s fundamental rules and
 social norms (e.g., with regard to privacy or decentralization) to comply
 with external rules and regulations, the gain in exogenous legitimacy could
 result in an erosion of endogenous legitimacy.
 Balancing both endogenous and exogenous legitimacy is therefore
 crucial for blockchain systems to thrive and gain acceptance in a rapidly
 evolving and interconnected world. In turn, acceptance and adoption is
 crucial as blockchain networks depend on the existence of network effects
 for their value and security. In this section, we will analyze the various
 ways in which blockchain systems might enhance their endogenous and
 exogenous legitimacy.
 First, as proposed by Mittiga, it may be useful to distinguish between two
 separate forms of legitimacy: foundational and contingent legitimacy.
 Foundational legitimacy pertains to a government’s ability to ensure the
 safety and security of its citizens, whereas contingent legitimacy subsists in
 situations in which governments “exercise power in acceptable ways.”8
 While the existence of contingent legitimacy depends on the situation in
 question, this might include a combination of procedural and substantive
 factors,9 such as “the presence of democratic rights and processes, consent,
 guarantees of equal representation, provision of core public benefits,
 protection of basic individual rights and freedoms, social justice, and
 observance of fairness principles.”10
 Applying these concepts in the context of blockchain technology can
 shed light on the multifaceted nature of legitimacy in these polycentric
systems. Foundational legitimacy in a blockchain system relates to the
 system’s ability to guarantee a secure and effective technological
 infrastructure. This comprises a blockchain’s technical aspects, such as its
 cryptographic security, consensus mechanisms, and resistance to attacks. A
 blockchain with strong foundational legitimacy is one where participants
 have full confidence in the safety and integrity of the network—that is, one
 that can be successfully assimilated to a “confidence machine.”11
 Conversely, contingent legitimacy in a blockchain system arises from how
 the governance and decision-making processes are conducted within the
 network. Similar to traditional governance settings, this form of legitimacy
 depends on both procedural and substantive factors. These include the type
 of 
decision-making 
meritocratic), 
the 
mechanisms 
concentration 
(e.g., 
of 
democratic, 
plutocratic,
 decision-making power, the
 representation of different stakeholders in the network’s governance, the
 protection of individuals’ rights to privacy and freedom of expression, and
 so on.
 In essence, while foundational legitimacy is concerned with the technical
 decentralization, robustness, and security of the blockchain system,
 contingent legitimacy addresses political decentralization and how power
 and authority are wielded within the network. A blockchain network with
 both foundational and contingent legitimacy is more likely to be accepted,
 and therefore adopted by the masses, because in such networks the
 underlying governance of the network is addressed to ensure that the
 technological guarantees of the network are not compromised.12 Thus,
 enhancing the foundational legitimacy and contingent legitimacy of a
 blockchain system is likely to have a positive effect on both endogenous
 and exogenous legitimacy.
 Yet, even if there is evidence of endogenous legitimacy, at the exogenous
 level, more normative conceptions of legitimacy might require evidence
 that blockchain systems guarantee the protection of basic human rights.13
 For instance, Schneider has argued that some of the various regulatory
 levers described in chapter 3 could be used to promote human rights.
 Market competition between various blockchain systems could be based,
 among other factors, on their commitment to human rights and
 environmental stewardship. Social norms among developers may evolve,
 leading to greater peer pressure to consider such factors when working on
new updates to a blockchain system. As regulation in this space proliferates,
 legislators might include basic rights and environmental protection
 requirements for network actors (e.g., to permit miners to operate).14
 To an extent, norms are evolving and market pressures are emerging that
 encourage tackling environmental harm and creating sustainable energy
 markets. A large proportion of PoW miners have shifted to using renewable
 energies, and some are arguably helping balance loads on electricity grids
 and reducing energy waste.15 Blockchain-based regenerative finance
 projects are gaining attention as an alternative to DeFi and offering
 opportunities to invest in clean energy, carbon offsets, and social
 enterprises.16 In some places, like New York State, a stricter regulatory
 approach has been adopted by placing a two-year moratorium on PoW
 mining that uses nonrenewable energy.17 When a public authority considers
 various regulatory options—which are partly targeted at achieving strong
 exogenous legitimacy—it is important for the authority to evaluate whether
 they may possibly jeopardize the endogenous legitimacy of these systems
 by weakening its foundational properties and technological guarantees.
 Another way of conceptualizing different types of legitimacy was
 provided by Schmidt, who distinguished between input legitimacy,
 throughput legitimacy, and output legitimacy. Input legitimacy is based on a
 governance system’s responsiveness to citizens’ concerns (i.e., governance
 by the people), and output legitimacy is determined by the effectiveness of
 a governance system’s policy outcomes (i.e., governance for the people).
 Throughput legitimacy depends on the quality of governance, as determined
 by the responsiveness of a governance system to “citizens’ input demands
 while ensuring the best possible policy outputs.”18 Accordingly, even if a
 governance system enjoys strong foundational legitimacy and contingent
 legitimacy, it may nonetheless lose its legitimacy if its outcomes
 consistently fail to meet the expectations of those it serves. Black has
 shown that perceived output legitimacy might be based on pragmatic
 grounds (i.e., the outcomes directly or indirectly pursue one’s personal
 interests), moral reasons (i.e., the outcomes are perceived as being morally
 appropriate), or simply on the basis that they are cognitively necessary or
 inevitable. For instance, when a cyclone strikes an area, its citizens may
 accept drastic measures to save people, such as ordering the evacuation of
homes.19 Legitimacy is thus clearly a relative concept: what is legitimate in
 one context may not be legitimate in another.
 Regarding output legitimacy in blockchain systems, participants may find
 pragmatic reasons to consider the system legitimate as long as it
 consistently delivers on its promised functionality. Block producers, for
 instance, receive economic rewards for their participation in maintaining
 the network, aligning with their financial self-interest. In exceptional
 situations, such as The DAO attack, participants may opt to endorse one
 fork over the other based on moral reasons (e.g., the belief that theft should
 not go unpunished). Additionally, they may cognitively accept a fork as an
 inevitable intervention that is necessary to preserve the network’s security
 and sustainability. A blockchain system may be perceived as having input
 legitimacy to the extent it can adapt and respond to the changing needs and
 concerns of the various stakeholders involved. The system may also have
 throughput legitimacy when it not only incorporates its participants’ voices
 and preferences but in doing so also effectively adapts to the changing
 technological and economic landscape.
 Blockchain systems do not always enjoy throughput legitimacy. The
 Bitcoin scaling debate has shown the difficulty for a blockchain network to
 implement a significant protocol change, thereby failing to respond to the
 demands for a greater throughput of transactions.20 The challenge in this
 case was that given the polycentric nature of public, permissionless
 blockchain systems, different stakeholders with their own vested interests
 might have very different expectations as to how a blockchain should
 operate or evolve. Any change in the network also incurs the risk of
 generating unexpected and unforeseeable consequences that might
 ultimately decrease the network’s output legitimacy. The same is true with
 regard to endogenous and exogenous legitimacy, where attending to the
 expectations of external policymakers and regulators to gain more input
 legitimacy (e.g., by supporting know your customer [KYC], AML, or
 counterterrorist financing [CTF] regulations) might ultimately impair the
 blockchain system’s throughput and output legitimacy from the perspective
 of internal stakeholders.
Blockchain Constitutions
 The use of the constitutionalism lens to explore the legitimacy of
 blockchain-based systems may appear surprising at first, but it is less so
 when we consider how conformity with higher-order rules is one of the
 essential sources of these systems’ legitimacy. As discussed above, beliefs
 about how others will act in a given situation are shaped by the technical
 and game theoretical rules embedded in a blockchain-based system.
 Protocol rules, such as consensus mechanisms, provide the basis on which
 the validity of new blocks can be tested. However, these on-chain rules may
 sometimes lack instructions about rulemaking on certain issues and
 principles that articulate a community’s shared values and norms—a gap
 that can make these systems less adaptable to change and emergencies.
 Without expressly articulating a system’s shared values and core principles,
 predictions about how others will act becomes more fragile and harder to
 anticipate. On-chain governance can become unreflective of developments
 off-chain, and the existence of Schelling points cannot be taken for granted.
 For several blockchain projects, the solution was articulating a constitution
 in an off-chain written document, stipulating a series of secondary rules on
 how primary (on-chain) rules are to be made, amended, or removed, along
 with a set of guiding principles. A constitution can serve several purposes,
 including the design of governance institutions,21 that is, specifying the
 legal basis and extent of the powers assigned to different actors, and
 providing the narrow conditions under which these arrangements can be
 changed.
 While states are the ones typically associated with constitutions, nonstate
 actors are also progressively adopting these documents. The ICANN
 (Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers) is a prominent
 example in this regard. To assign domain names, ICANN brings together a
 constellation of state and nonstate actors within a governance system that
 has its own dispute resolution system as well as its own set of secondary
 rules (i.e., rules on how to make rules). As a consequence, some scholars
 argue that ICANN has created its own constitutional order.22 This claim has
 been buttressed by recent work in the field of digital constitutionalism,
 which argues that large, multinational tech firms like Meta are undergoing a
 process of constitutionalization23 and in doing so ought to incorporate the
values of contemporary liberal democracies into their constitutional orders,
 including adherence to the rule of law and upholding human dignity.24 It is
 from these conceptual developments that the notion of “blockchain
 constitutionalism” has emerged.
 Some scholars argue that blockchain networks already have
 constitutional rule sets and constraints enshrined into the protocols.25 This
 “formal” constitution, articulated through software code, sets the terms of
 what is and what isn’t permissible on the network and, as mentioned in
 chapter 3 (rule of code), guarantees that these rules cannot be unilaterally
 changed by any network participant. The formal on-chain constitution of
 Bitcoin also embodies certain core principles, such as a limit on the number
 of Bitcoin that will ever be emitted.
 The on-chain constitution is not set in stone as there is always the
 opportunity to fork a blockchain protocol, thereby exerting a “competitive
 pressure” on the previous protocol.26 Moreover, not all elements of a
 blockchain constitution exist on-chain: the constitution of many blockchain
 networks also comprise formalized off-chain procedures like BIPs for
 Bitcoin and EIPs for Ethereum, as well as a series of informal norms and
 customs. These off-chain processes are instrumental to critical blockchain
 governance debates and are likely to inform the community’s course of
 action regarding any proposed changes at the protocol layer.
 As with state constitutions—where the formal constitution always faces
 pressures to represent the “actual relations of forces” in the state (i.e., forces
 exerted by the interests of capital, the working class)27—blockchain-based
 systems also face pressures to reconcile their “formal” constitution with
 their “material” one. The on-chain formal constitution may not accurately
 represent the principles and beliefs of a blockchain community as it lacks
 the flexibility to reflect these principles in natural language. Furthermore, it
 may lack a mechanism to understand and enforce these principles. This is
 where formal off-chain constitutions come in.
 A written constitution, in an ideal sense, would bridge the on- and off
chain elements of blockchain governance and enable a tighter and more
 responsive connection between the formal constitution recorded on-chain
 and the more tacit material constitution that mostly subsists off-chain. For
 instance, the Ethereum Naming Service (ENS) protocol (i.e., Ethereum’s
 equivalent of the Internet’s Domain Name Service system) is governed by a
constitution that provides “binding rules that determine what governance
 actions are legitimate for the [ENS] DAO to take” as well as the quorum
 and supermajority voting requirements needed to amend the constitution.28
 Over 84,000 accounts signed the constitution, and as a result, DAO
 governance proposals are only supported if they align with the ENS DAO
 Constitution.
 As Tan and colleagues show, many of these documents also articulate
 more general principles and values held by the community (with openness,
 inclusivity, and decentralization being common themes).29 In the case of the
 1Hive DAO (a community of Web3 builders), the goals and principles that
 guide the community are complemented with a dispute resolution system
 that allows the interpretation of whether community values are being
 upheld, providing a way of addressing ambiguity that is not possible
 through purely on-chain governance. Recent disputes in 1Hive have
 invoked specific clauses of the community covenant (i.e., fostering a
 healthy community economy) to challenge the legal validity (i.e.,
 constitutionality) of resource allocation proposals that would allegedly lead
 to unhealthy outcomes. This dispute resolution process bears a strong
 resemblance to the process of judicial review, where ordinary legislation is
 tested for compliance with the constitution.
 As with political governance, there is more than one path toward
 enhancing a blockchain system’s legitimacy. Optimistically, the drafting of
 such constitutions would enhance the endogenous legitimacy of blockchain
 systems as they would explicitly articulate shared values. These shared
 values, and being able to collectively enforce these values, can contribute to
 strengthening the pattern of higher-order acceptance that is central to
 Buterin’s vision of legitimacy. More ambitiously, this development can
 shape new normative conceptions of legitimacy that further people’s
 freedom and human rights.
 A more pessimistic outlook would be that such constitutions are
 aspirational at best and dead letters at worst. In lieu of more blockchain
 constitutions having robust, yet distributed, enforcement mechanisms, value
 statements could potentially create new sources of community discord (e.g.,
 for not being sufficiently representative) or even legal risk (i.e., for
 potentially creating new types of liabilities on the participants to the
 network). This could, perversely, undermine the legitimacy of a blockchain
based system. However, as Alston and colleagues argue, these different
 approaches to, and debates about, constitutionalization open up competitive
 dynamics among different governance systems. In competing to offer
 legitimate governance systems, we anticipate that best practices will emerge
 on the design of blockchain constitutions.30
 * * *
 Drawing from debates concerning the distinction between legitimacy and
 legality, and the political conception of legitimacy, chapter 7 critically
 analyzed the claim that legitimacy is the most important scarce resource of
 blockchain-based systems. Yet, the role that legitimacy plays in a
 blockchain system is very different from the role it plays in more
 traditional, coercive governance structures. By showing that blockchain
 systems can foster their legitimacy by integrating both on- and off-chain
 governance processes, this chapter has illustrated the significance of
 legitimacy in blockchain networks, emphasizing the importance of rules
 that are not only being legally defined (on- or off-chain) but also genuinely
 accepted and respected by the community. This was further demonstrated
 by recent efforts to formalize procedural and substantive constitutional rules
 in an off-chain document, with a view to improving the overall governance
 and legitimacy of blockchain systems. As these off-chain constitutional
 texts proliferate, we argue that it is important for drafters to carefully
 consider the trade-offs that exist in seeking both endogenous and exogenous
 legitimacy.
 OceanofPDF.com
8
 Cryptopia
 Man is born free but everywhere is in chains.
 —Jean-Jacques Rousseau, The Social Contract 1
 (Un)chained
 “The car decelerated at the turn. Alina knew how it saw the world: lidar
 point clouds, IoT sensor oracle feeds, chain IDs—with algorithms
 predicting where everything was going to be seconds, minutes, days from
 now.” In this snapshot from a short story titled Unchained,2 Hannu
 Rajaniemi imagines what the future of blockchain might look like. In this
 future, crypto is not just money or an asset class but a general infrastructure,
 connecting physical objects like cars with AI agents. The story features a
 smart car—the Tesla of tomorrow—that functions according to an internal
 reward system that incentivizes certain uses. It is used by a happy couple
 who got married using a smart contract that guarantees mutual fidelity. This
 smart contract is linked with their wedding rings, which are capable of
 signaling betrayal. One day, Alina’s ring reveals her that her partner has
 cheated on her, and she is now facing divorce. This might seem
 unremarkable—after all, infidelity is not uncommon. Yet, there’s a catch:
 the smart car’s AI system had developed a problematic profit-maximization
 strategy based on a pattern that cheating couples tended to use the car more.
 Additionally, it discovered the profitability of selling adultery data to the AI
 judge that would decide on the termination of the marriage contract. In
 short, the AI system had generated the incentive to get Alina’s partner to
 cheat and did so by putting him in the car with his perfect match.
 The story captures some of the core directions of travel for the future of
 blockchain technology. To start, blockchain technology is poised to become
 an infrastructural technology, much like the Internet protocols. This will
 result from a symbiosis and synthesis with other emerging technologies,
most notably with smart devices and AI. Smart devices will allow for
 blockchains to be integrated into the physical environment, from cars to
 passports. This also means that physical devices directly become
 contractual devices. For instance, your future car might be directly
 governed by a car insurance policy—stored on a smart contract—that keeps
 track of your driving habits. Integration with AI will then allow smart
 contracts to not only execute pregiven rules but also condition execution on
 the machine learning’s interpretation of data.
 Moreover, this merging of emerging technologies signals the use of
 blockchain technology beyond the first use case of money. To be sure, this
 tendency has already been convincingly demonstrated by the use of
 blockchain for financial products, social media, prediction markets, and so
 forth. Yet, some of the biggest promises of blockchain—for instance, its use
 in supply chain management—are, at the moment of writing, still exactly
 that: mere promises. Once the linking and integration of technologies
 becomes increasingly successful, the reality depicted by Rajaniemi becomes
 more likely. This would open the gates toward a society that organizes
 many of its contractual relations, from commerce to marriage, by means of
 blockchain technology. It would further accelerate the demise of the
 ownership society and usher in contractual societies that foster a new
 sociolegal and political worldview and ideology. As Rajaniemi shows, it
 may alter our understanding of institutions like marriage and also impact
 our judgment as humans—given that judgments will increasingly be the
 function of the execution of a smart contract rather than of our own
 observations and considerations.
 Would this future be a good or a bad one, and what would Cryptopia look
 like? The answer to these questions is uncertain, but at least three pathways
 have become discernible. First, blockchain technology might turn out to
 become the ultimate technology of control, able to put all human
 relationships not into proverbial, but effective, digital chains. In this tyranny
 of code, all human activities are liable to rules encoded in one or a few
 blockchains controlled by plutocratic elites. In this world, there will be a
 widening gap between the haves and the have nots. Second, the state system
 might do everything in its power to reel in blockchain technology,
 diminishing its decentralizing efforts and making it part of the state
 structure. The clearest example here is the rise of central bank digital
 currencies, which are now pursued by all major economies. Third, there is
the vision of a pluralist world of DAOs, one that echoes some of the utopian
 ideals of anarchists and cypherpunks like Barlow. In this future, DAOs
 could both help preserve privacy from surveillance and be responsible for
 providing various public goods and services, such as health care, education,
 and environmental sustainability.
 TL;DR
 As this book has shown, blockchain governance engages core concepts and
 challenges that feature in sociology, legal theory, and political philosophy.
 These become relevant through the practical and material realities of
 blockchain technologies: the on-chain configurations of protocols, the off
chain governance practices of blockchain communities, and so on. These
 practices of on- and off-chain governance in turn challenge established
 political and legal concepts. For instance, our understanding of trust in
 organizations is challenged by the feature of blockchain being a confidence
 machine. And similarly, our understanding of measures to enhance
 legitimacy is challenged by the limitations of coercion, and the role played
 by exit strategies, in blockchain-based systems.
 Blockchain technology might turn out to become the ultimate
 technology of control, able to put all human relationships not into
 proverbial, but effective, digital chains.
 For those readers in a hurry, here comes the TL;DR (“too long, didn’t
 read”). First, blockchain technology plunges us into a new chapter of the
 discourse on law and technology. At first, the field was shaped by the
 emergence of the Internet. The Internet fostered an architectural mode of
 regulation, according to which code would shape the possibilities of a user’s
 action, thereby encoding equivalences of legal rights, duties, privileges, and
 prohibitions. In other words, code is law, at least seemingly so. That this
 only seemed to be the case became especially clear with the rise of Internet
 platforms, which centralized power and thereby both became a target of
 regulation by the state and sought to instrumentalize software and legal
 codes for its own ends. Blockchain, by resisting centralization and coercive
control, offers an alternative to this rule by code: the rule of code. Just as
 with the rule of law, this raises important legal and political questions: what
 procedural and substantive rules should define the rule of code?
 Second, blockchain at its core raises the issues of trust and trustlessness.
 It is meant to do away with trust in third parties, but what does it give us in
 return? In sociology, we find the helpful distinction between trust—
 requiring, among others, an addressee and conscious risk-taking—and
 confidence—requiring, among others, nonaddressable systems and
 predictability devoid of risk-taking. Blockchain, then, can be described as a
 confidence machine, where a synthesis of cryptographic primitives,
 determinative computing, and consensus building produces shared
 expectations that transactions will be correctly executed. The challenge,
 however, is to realize that this confidence still depends on a network of
 actors that requires trust relations. In turn, trust requires the right
 governance systems and practices to be implemented.
 Third, the blockchain confidence machine functions well under normal
 circumstances but can be significantly challenged by crises. Such a crisis
 can emerge when a vulnerability in the code is exploited, which in the worst
 case can lead to an existential threat to a blockchain-based system. When
 such a threat emerges, private interests in a blockchain network may
 coalesce and organize themselves as a sovereign power that can decide on
 whether a state of exception exists and how to resolve it. We can draw
 lessons about this vulnerability from scholars like Kelsen and Schmitt.
 Possible responses to the state of exception’s vulnerability include
 strengthening on-chain governance, such as by using PoW instead of
 segregated witnesses, as well as enhancing off-chain governance, which
 could involve making rules for the temporary delegation of executive
 powers to particular actors in a blockchain network.
 Fourth, even in normal times blockchain technology is somewhat of a
 strange regulatory beast because it resists being regulated. As a more potent
 successor of the claim to “unregulability” of the early Internet, a blockchain
 network cannot be coerced or simply shut down by any agency, like a state.
 That is why blockchain proponents have called it an alegal technology,
 beyond the grasp of the law. Drawing from the legal theory of Lindahl, this
 claim is warranted to some extent—but not in the same sense as blockchain
 advocates suggest. Blockchain indeed enables “alegality by design” by
configuring actions that may transgress legal boundaries. Yet, states have
 ways to deal with this alegality, which in some cases involves regulating
 important intermediaries like exchanges, and in other cases finding
 functional or regulatory equivalences to shape the legality of blockchain
 systems.
 Fifth, blockchain systems only function when they enjoy legitimacy.
 Legitimacy, which Buterin called the most important scarce resource of
 blockchain systems, is needed for a blockchain community to maintain
 itself and to thrive. It justifies the power vested in the network, which is
 derived from adherence to specific rules (e.g., those governing blockchain
 updates), respect for shared beliefs (e.g., immutability), and is usually
 evidenced by the consent of its participants. Blockchain systems are special
 in that they allow for relatively easy exit (people can simply leave or fork
 the blockchain) but depend on the existence of network effects. This raises
 the importance of voice and loyalty. In most political communities, these
 aspects are promoted by means of a constitution, a formal document
 supported by a set of legal norms that justifies the authoritative use of
 power. Like states, blockchains have constitutions that sit between on-chain
 (i.e., the protocol) and off-chain governance. Building legitimacy in
 blockchain systems may be achieved through efforts to draft off-chain
 constitutions, as some blockchain communities are experimenting with
 now, but this process entails its own risks.
 Policy
 Given this TL;DR, there are many challenges of blockchain governance
 faced by both policymakers and blockchain communities. How can trust be
 raised through better governance practices? How can blockchain systems be
 made less vulnerable to states of exception? How can the inherent alegality
 of blockchain’s design be integrated into existing legal systems without
 undermining decentralization? How can good governance be formulated
 and implemented for polycentric blockchain-based systems? And, the most
 important question, how can the legitimacy of blockchain governance be
 ensured? Given these myriad questions, different avenues exist for
 policymakers to respond to the challenges of regulation and governance
raised by blockchain technology. On the whole, there are two dominant
 pathways.
 First, governments may pursue “regulation by code,” which would follow
 the dominant approach to Internet governance. Second, governments may
 pursue a more unconventional but possibly more promising “regulation via
 governance” approach. Let us look at these two paradigms.
 The rise of large Internet platforms has made it apparent that
 governments can use the codebase of these platforms to implement
 regulations. Perhaps the most influential case would be the European
 Union’s GDPR. Because this regulation sets standards and limits for the
 potential configurations of the code developed by centralized organizations,
 it uses the law-like nature of code to its own advantage. This also allows for
 code to be audited, to assess whether it incorporates the proper regulatory
 safeguards, and for organizations to be penalized if these are absent. The
 centralized nature of players like Google and Meta is a regulatory
 advantage here because these organizations can function as extensions of
 the arm of the law. This also becomes apparent, for instance, in criminal
 investigations, when agencies like the FBI can pressure companies into
 disclosing users’ personal information. Companies, to be sure, still maintain
 positions of relative autonomy. This was clearly demonstrated by the
 conflict between Apple and the FBI, where the former refused to provide a
 “backdoor” into an iPhone’s code to give law enforcement access to this
 phone during a criminal investigation. Yet even though sovereignty in these
 matters isn’t exclusively tied to the state, it is tied to centralized entities and
 divorced from the user base. X users, for instance, will have to abide either
 to the rule of law enforced by a state like the United States or to the rule of
 Elon Musk, who can unilaterally change the codebase (e.g., by taking away
 the “right” of users to have a blue checkmark).
 Blockchain problematizes and challenges this picture. As we saw in
 chapters 3 and 6, blockchain-based systems introduce the rule of code,
 which raises the possibility of alegality by design, that is, the potential of
 these systems to enable acts that transgress legal boundaries. Unlike a
 centralized platform like X, blockchain-based systems execute code without
 the possibility of coercion by any single operator. Moreover, they are
 transnational and (to some extent) decentralized, meaning that shutting
 down part of a network will not affect the operations of the overall network.
This poses significant challenges to regulators, and states have been busy
 finding ways to reel in the anarchic potential of blockchain-based systems.
 To be sure, some of these efforts are backed by good reasons, for instance,
 in cases of cyber criminality and theft. Yet, there is also a risk of throwing
 out the baby with the bathwater and undoing some of the innovative
 potentials of blockchain technology.
 It is tempting for governments to focus on the low-hanging fruit, which
 means regulating powerful intermediaries in blockchain networks. Indeed,
 blockchain governance is not purely decentralized but rather functions
 according to the dynamics of a polycentric system. Many of the
 stakeholders in a blockchain network are incorporated as legal entities in
 specific jurisdictions, and are thus susceptible to government regulation.
 First, mining activities achieved by small businesses or large mining pools
 are an easy target of state regulation. A case in point is Iran, where
 commercial mining licenses were initially granted in the years 2019–2020.
 Later on, however, the political situation changed, and under the surging
 “climate of fear” in the country, all mining operations were banned to
 protect against potential energy blackouts. These types of repressive mining
 regulations can have a negative impact on local businesses, but do not
 significantly affect the overall functioning of a blockchain, as long as there
 are sufficient mining activities carried out elsewhere.
 Second in line are cryptocurrency exchanges and custodian wallets.
 Because powerful exchanges like Coinbase or Binance control the private
 keys of their users, they can effectively regulate transactions. Governments
 have become aware of this crucial function of exchanges, having already
 implemented KYC, AML, and CTF regulations for the legal operation of
 crypto exchanges. In the future, this may even lead to a situation where
 specific addresses or blockchain wallets can be “whitelisted,” while others
 may be “blacklisted.” In the wake of the FTX scandal, more comprehensive
 regulation of cryptocurrency exchanges can be expected. Yet, this
 regulatory approach also has its limitations, as customers who might not
 agree with these rules can opt for exchanges operating in jurisdictions with
 less stringent regulations, or even decentralized exchanges.
 Third, even people can become a target of blockchain regulation, most
 notably developers and end users. The Tornado Cash sanctions, discussed in
 chapter 6, have put this issue firmly on the agenda. Not only have Tornado
Cash developers been prosecuted and imprisoned in the United States and
 the Netherlands, it has also become illegal for US citizens, residents, and
 incorporated companies to transact with the Tornado Cash smart contract.
 Anyone who is caught violating these sanctions will be held criminally
 liable. Of course, because of the pseudonymous nature of blockchain
 networks, it is often difficult (but not impossible) to identify who transacts
 with a smart contract. Another limitation of these regulations is that they are
 bound to particular jurisdictions and developers can simply move to places
 with less stringent regulatory regimes. However, when powerful countries
 like the United States implement these rules, their impact can extend
 beyond the local jurisdiction, as shown by the fact that the Tornado Cash
 sanctions have led block producers and exchanges around the world to
 censor transactions coming from or directed toward these smart contracts.
 Thus, states can, albeit indirectly, regulate blockchain-based systems
 quite effectively. But at what cost? As we discussed in chapter 7, stringent
 regulation can affect the legitimacy of blockchain-based systems, which
 may motivate people to exit some systems and look for a better regulatory
 regime elsewhere. It also raises the question of fairness. Unlike developers
 working in large companies, blockchain developers working on open
source software can propose changes but have very limited power to decide
 which changes are incorporated in the codebase. Is it therefore fair to hold a
 single developer responsible for a change to an open-source project in
 which pieces of code result from many decisions by many people? There
 are also structural limitations to personal responsibility as was demonstrated
 when anonymous users started to send small amounts of Ether from the
 Tornado Cash smart contract to the wallets of famous public figures, like
 television host Jimmy Fallon. These actions showed that even though
 Fallon would be formally liable, his inability to control the transaction
 directed to his account makes it challenging to attribute responsibility.
 Eventually, increasingly stringent regulation that follows the “regulation
 by code” model may undermine the very innovative potential of
 blockchain-based systems. First, it may propel the movement toward
 greater centralization and disincentivize governance experimentation and
 innovation since communities will experience less autonomy. For instance,
 people will feel less inclined to support processes of blockchain governance
 as token holders, as they may fear the burden of liability. And second, it
 may also have an adverse “race to the bottom” effect because people may
choose to exit more strictly regulated systems and look for a new “land” in
 the buccaneering free haven of the network state, moving the more radical
 systems even further away from regulatory scrutiny.
 The dilemma pictured above forces us to think: does blockchain
 governance challenge the established ways of regulating technology? If
 regulation 
by 
code proves counterproductive, might blockchain
 communities, legal and political scholars, and policymakers need to seek
 out better regulatory environments? Perhaps blockchain raises the core
 question of regulation under the aegis of cybernetic systems: is regulation
 still a function of institutional discipline through the law, or is it becoming a
 function of distributed control? This would mean that blockchain systems
 and state legislation mutually adapt to one another, functioning as two
 distinct organisms that need to establish new relationships of coordination
 and control.
 A promising approach to enable this process of mutual adaptation is the
 establishment of regulatory sandboxes that allow for controlled
 experimentation with novel governance forms. Think about the federated
 structure of ancient Greece, where many smaller instances of the polis
 could experiment with radically new forms of government. A regulatory
 sandbox implies a scoped regulatory regime, for instance, limited to a
 particular locality or domain, that allows for greater flexibility and
 experimentation in the field of governance. It allows for a controlled
 environment in which people can experiment with new technologies and
 business models alike, while being exempt from some existing financial
 regulations and legal requirements. In a sandbox, for instance, initial coin
 offerings (ICOs) could be made legal provided that they meet specific
 criteria, inviting practitioners to innovate in order to match these criteria,
 while giving time for regulations to adapt in order to accommodate these
 technological innovations.
 Regulatory sandboxes are helpful for finding ways to establish
 “functional equivalence” and “regulatory equivalence” between regulations
 in the rule of code and those of the rule of law. Functional equivalence
 establishes the equivalence of two technological artifacts, one that is
 covered by a legal rule and one that is not yet covered by a legal rule. A
 relevant example is establishing the equivalence of a paper contract with an
 electronic contract. Regulatory equivalence means establishing the
equivalence of a regulatory regime with a technological implementation of
 the policy objectives of said regulatory regimes. For instance, DAOs
 deployed on a public blockchain, having a graphical user interface that
 enable laypersons to monitor key smart contract variables and transactions,
 along with plain-language “bylaws” accessible through a public webpage,
 could be recognized as equivalent to business filings at a corporate registrar.
 Arguably, this technological implementation can meet the publicity and
 transparency policy objectives embodied in a corporate governance regime.
 As such, regulatory sandboxes can bring about a more constructive form
 of mutual adjustment between state regulations and blockchain governance.
 However, given that blockchain communities cannot be forced into this
 mutual adjustment, conditions should be created that incentivize their
 engagement. Such an approach, not based on coercion but on incentives,
 might tame the potential dangers of blockchain governance while not
 undoing its innovative potential.
 An important point of leverage here are the social norms that shape the
 on- and off-chain governance of blockchain-based systems, which can be
 influenced by exogenous factors. The strong influence of social norms on
 governance can be demonstrated by the difference between Bitcoin and
 Ethereum. While the Bitcoin community emphasizes the value of
 immutability and the code-is-law principle, the Ethereum community has
 evolved into foregrounding distributed consensus, making it easier for the
 system to flexibly adapt to new circumstances.
 Policymakers can try to influence the social norms that codetermine the
 governance processes of blockchain-based systems by means of incentives.
 How this works can be illustrated by the case of the Parity bug, as discussed
 in chapter 5. As a solution to the freezing of over USD 300 million worth of
 Ether at the time, the Ethereum community decided not to intervene. This
 decision was partly motivated by the potential exogenous pressures that
 community members might have faced had intervention occurred. If a
 standardized procedure for fund recovery had been enabled, some feared,
 members might have found themselves liable as fiduciaries. Even though it
 is not clear whether the regulatory environment had a positive impact on the
 governance process in this particular case, it illustrates the power of states
 to nudge blockchain communities to adapt new standards, engage in
constitutionalizing, and develop governance innovations in particular
 directions.
 Building Cryptopia
 The Cambrian explosion of governance structures spurred by blockchain
 technology is in full swing. It is probable that many new forms of
 governance will emerge over time as the space progressively matures. But
 what will the future of blockchain governance look like? Just as Aristotle
 saw the revolution of governance models eventually consolidate into the
 unified empire of Alexander the Great, might we expect a consolidation of
 blockchain governance structures? Or will blockchain technology help us
 come up with new governance systems that we cannot even conceive of
 today?
 The answers that this book presented to these questions perhaps generate
 more, rather than less, complexity and uncertainty regarding the possible
 futures of blockchain governance. But this may also be its core lesson.
 Blockchain governance is not just a matter of building better rule-of-code
 systems, with an improved code base and incentive mechanisms. Rather, it
 also involves grappling with the complex interplay between on- and off
chain governance, trust and confidence building, normal times and
 emergencies, regulatory oversight and innovative power, dimensions of
 polycentricity, as well as formal and material constitutional constraints.
 This is a vast area of investigation, and we are only getting started. What is
 clear, however, is that building a Cryptopia for realists is urgent and
 requires collective action, involving crypto communities, scientists, and
 policymakers.
 OceanofPDF.com
Glossary
 Alegality Alegality refers to a state where an action exists in a legal gray
 area, neither explicitly allowed nor expressly prohibited by existing laws
 and regulations but by its very existence seeks to change how the
 distinction between legal and illegal is drawn. In the context of
 blockchain systems, alegality may pertain to activities or innovations that
 operate on the edge of legality, often challenging traditional legal
 frameworks and prompting the need for regulatory clarification.
 Bitcoin Bitcoin is the first cryptocurrency and decentralized payment
 network created by an anonymous entity known as Satoshi Nakamoto in
 2009. It operates on a blockchain, using a proof-of-work consensus
 mechanism, and serves as a store of value and medium of exchange
 without the need for intermediaries, central authorities, or physical
 representation.
 Blockchain A blockchain is a distributed and append-only digital ledger
 technology that records transactions across a network of computers,
 ensuring transparency, security, and verifiability. It relies on
 cryptographic techniques and consensus mechanisms to enable
 decentralized and tamper-resistant data storage and verification.
 Confidence Confidence refers to the expectations that people hold with
 regard to how things or systems operate. In the context of blockchain
 systems, confidence arises from the systems’ resiliency and reliability,
 the immutability and tamper-resistance attributes of the blockchain, and
 the predictability of its operations grounded in deterministic computation.
 Cryptocurrency Cryptocurrency is a digital form of currency that relies on
 a 
blockchain network and cryptographic techniques to secure
 transactions, control the creation of new units, and verify the transfer of
 these digital assets, often used as a means of exchange within
 decentralized ecosystems.
 Cypherpunks Cypherpunks are individuals who advocate for strong
 cryptography and the use of privacy-enhancing technologies to protect
individual freedoms and privacy in the digital age. Their ideas and
 ideologies have significantly influenced the development of blockchain
 technology.
 Decentralized autonomous organization (DAO) A decentralized
 autonomous organization, or DAO, is a blockchain-based organization
 that operates through code and smart contracts. This structure enables
 members to make collective decisions and manage shared resources
 without centralized control, often with voting mechanisms that determine
 governance decisions and resource allocation.
 Ethereum Ethereum is a blockchain platform and cryptocurrency created
 by Vitalik Buterin in 2015. It enables the development of smart contracts
 and decentralized applications on its network, providing a versatile
 platform for various blockchain-based projects and governance
 mechanisms beyond simple value transfer.
 Hash In cryptography, a hash is a fixed-length string of characters
 generated from input data of arbitrary size using a mathematical one-way
 function called a hash function. This process produces a unique digital
 fingerprint, or hash value, for each unique set of input data. In the
 blockchain context, hashes are used to represent the content of a block or
 transaction, serving as a unique identifier for data integrity and security
 purposes.
 Legitimacy Legitimacy refers to the perception and acceptance of a
 governance system’s authority and adherence to established rules and
 principles by its participants and stakeholders. Legitimacy is essential for
 the long-term sustainability of a blockchain network characterized by low
 exit costs and significant network effects.
 Merkle tree A Merkle tree is a data structure that organizes and efficiently
 verifies the integrity of a large dataset by breaking it down into smaller,
 interconnected datasets, where each set is represented by a cryptographic
 hash. This hierarchical structure enables quick and secure verification of
 specific data elements without needing to process the entire dataset,
 enhancing data integrity and efficiency in blockchain transactions and
 validation.
 Mining Mining in the blockchain context refers to the process by which
 network participants, known as miners, use computational power to solve
 complex mathematical puzzles and validate transactions on the
blockchain. Miners play a crucial role in securing the network and are
 generally rewarded with cryptocurrency for their efforts.
 Polycentricity Polycentricity refers to a governance system where multiple
 interdependent centers of decision-making and authority coexist, each
 trying to influence each other to promote their own interests while
 nonetheless abiding by a shared set of commonly agreed-upon norms.
 Proof of stake (PoS) Proof of stake, or PoS, is a consensus algorithm
 employed in blockchain networks where validators, chosen based on the
 amount of cryptocurrency they hold and are willing to “stake” as
 collateral, take turns validating transactions and creating new blocks,
 thereby reducing the energy consumption associated with mining in
 proof-of-work systems while maintaining a similar level of security.
 Proof of work (PoW) Proof of work, or PoW, is a consensus algorithm
 used in blockchain networks where participants, known as miners,
 compete to solve complex mathematical puzzles using computational
 power to validate and add new blocks to the blockchain, thereby ensuring
 network security and integrity.
 Rule by code The rule by code, by analogy to the rule by law, refers to the
 idea that rules encoded in a digital platform can be used to dictate the
 affordances and constraints for that platform’s users. Yet, the operator of
 the platform is not itself bound by this regulation by code and can
 therefore instrumentalize the code to further its own interests.
 Rule of code The rule of code, by analogy to the rule of law, refers to the
 idea that rules encoded in smart contracts and blockchain protocols are
 autonomously and impartially enforced by the technological
 infrastructure of the blockchain. This reduces the possibility for any
 single actor to unilaterally affect the operations of the code unless the
 code specifically provides for that.
 Smart contract A smart contract is a piece of code deployed on a
 blockchain network that defines a series of possible actions based on a
 set of rules and conditions. When predefined conditions are met, the
 blockchain network automatically executes the smart contract’s code in a
 deterministic manner. Because it does not run on a centralized server, no
 single actor can influence or terminate the execution of a smart contract.
 State of exception State of exception refers to a legal or political condition
 where normal legal procedures and civil liberties are temporarily
suspended, often during emergencies or crises, granting the government
 or ruling authority extraordinary powers to address the situation. In a
 blockchain context, it refers to situations where a blockchain protocol or
 smart contract does not operate as expected, therefore requiring an
 extraordinary intervention that violates the protocol rules.
 Time stamp In the blockchain context, a time stamp is a cryptographic
 record of the exact date and time when a transaction or block is added to
 the blockchain, ensuring chronological order and data integrity, which is
 essential for auditability, verification, and consensus in distributed ledger
 systems.
 Trust Trust involves the expectation that others will act in a manner
 consistent with one’s expectations, commitments, and shared values,
 even if they have the opportunity not to. Trust constitutes the basis for
 cooperation, relationships, and social cohesion. It can manifest in various
 forms, including interpersonal trust, institutional trust, and trust in the
 functioning of systems and processes.
 OceanofPDF.com
Notes
Chapter 1
 1. William Gibson, Neuromancer (New York: Ace Books, 1994), 173.
 2. Francis Fukuyama, The End of History and the Last Man (New York: The Free Press,
 1992), ix.
 3. Aristotle, Politics, ed. and trans. C. D. C. Reeve (Cambridge, MA: Hackett Publishing
 Company, 1998), 1266b, 38–42.
 4. Aristotle, Politics, 1267a, 30–35.
 5. Aristotle, Politics, 1269b, 12–38.
 6. Aristotle, Politics, 1272b, 21–30.
 7. Aristotle, Politics, 1274a, 1–10.
 8. David Graeber and David Wengrow, The Dawn of Everything: A New History of Humanity
 (London: Penguin, 2022), 9–10.
 9. Graeber and Wengrow, Dawn of Everything, 4.
 10. Maarten Prak, Citizens without Nations (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2018),
 58.
 11. Chris Jennings, Paradise Now: The Story of American Utopianism (New York: Random
 House, 2016), introduction, Kindle.
 12. Lewis Mumford, “Utopia, the City and the Machine,” Daedalus 94, no. 2 (Spring 1965):
 283.
 13. Gibson, Neuromancer.
 14. Neal Stephenson, The Diamond Age, or, Young Lady’s Illustrated Primer (New York:
 Bantam Books, 1995), 25–28.
 15. Ada Palmer, Too Like the Lightning (London: Head of Zeus, 2017), 17.
 16. Liav Orgad and Rainer Baubock, “Cloud Communities: The Dawn of Global
 Citizenship?” (RSCAS Working Paper 2018/28, Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced
 Studies, 
European 
University 
https://hdl.handle.net/1814/55464.
 Institute, 
Fiesole, 
Italy, 
2018),
 17. Marshall McLuhan, The Gutenberg Galaxy (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1962).
 18. Palmer, Lightning, 1.
 19. Federica Carugati and Nathan Schneider, “Governance Archeology: Research as
 Ancestry,” Daedalus 152, no. 1 (Winter 2023): 245, https://doi.org/10.1162/daed_a_01985.
 20. Douglas Rushkoff, Survival of the Richest: Escape Fantasies of the Tech Billionaires
 (New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2022), chapter 1, Kindle.
 21. Sinclair Davidson, Primavera De Filippi, and Jason Potts, “Blockchains and the Economic
 Institutions of Capitalism,” Journal of Institutional Economics 14, no. 4 (2018): 640.
 22. Vili Lehdonvirta, “The Blockchain Paradox: Why Distributed Ledger Technologies May
 Do Little to Transform the Economy,” Oxford Internet Institute, November 21, 2016,
 https://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/news-events/news/the-blockchain-paradox-why-distributed
ledger-technologies-may-do-little-to-transform-the-economy/.
23. 
Iris 
Chiu, Regulating the Crypto Economy: Business Transformations and
 Financialisation (Oxford: Hart Publishing, 2021), 118; Michèle Finck, Blockchain
 Regulation and Governance in Europe (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2018),
 184.
 24. Sinclair Davidson and Jason Potts, “Corporate Governance in a Crypto-World” (working
 paper, May 2022), 11, https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4099906.
 25. Chiu, Crypto Economy, 114–115.
 26. Nathan Schneider, “Cryptoeconomics as a Limitation on Governance,” Mirror, August 11,
 2022, https://ntnsndr.mirror.xyz/zO27EOn9P_62jVlautpZD5hHB7ycf3Cfc2N6byz6DOk.
Chapter 2
 1. Timothy May, “The Crypto-Anarchist Manifesto,” in Crypto Anarchy, Cyberstates, and
 Pirate Utopias, ed. Peter Ludlow (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001), 61.
 2. Hannah Arendt, “The Modern Concept of History,” Review of Politics 20, no. 4 (October
 1958): 570–590, https://doi.org/10.1017/S0034670500034227.
 3. Hal Finney, “Re: Many Worlds Theory of Immortality,” email message to the Everything
 List, May 9, 2005, https://riceissa.github.io/everything-list-1998-2009/6431.html.
 4. Finn Brunton, Digital Cash: The Unknown History of the Anarchists, Utopians, and
 Technologists Who Created Cryptocurrency (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2020),
 55.
 5. Max More, “The Extropian Principles,” Extropy Magazine 6 (1990): 17–18.
 6. Max More, “The Extropian Principles, Version 3.0: A Transhumanist Declaration,” Extropy
 Institute, 1998, https://www.mrob.com/pub/religion/extro_prin.html.
 7. Raymend Craib, Adventure Capitalism: A History of Libertarian Exit, from the Era of
 Decolonization to the Digital Age (New York: PM Press, 2022), 6.
 8. Rushkoff, Survival of the Richest, chapter 1.
 9. May, “Crypto-Anarchist Manifesto,” 61–62.
 10. Brunton, Digital Cash, 66.
 List, 
11. Satoshi Nakamoto, “Bitcoin P2P E-Cash Paper,” email message to the Cryptography
 Mailing 
October 
31, 
2008, 
https://satoshi.nakamotoinstitute.org/emails/cryptography/1/.
 18:10:00 
(UTC),
 12. Arvind Narayanan and Jeremy Clark, “Bitcoin’s Academic Pedigree,” Communications of
 the ACM 60, no. 12 (2017): 36–45.
 13. Hashing functions are often used to create unique identifiers for digital files. The
 properties of these functions are such that even the smallest modification to a digital file
 will generate a completely different and unpredictable hash as an output.
 14. Brunton, Digital Cash, 166.
 15. Alexander Neumueller, “Bitcoin Electricity Consumption: An Improved Assessment,”
 University of Cambridge, Judge Business School Insights, August 31, 2023,
 https://www.jbs.cam.ac.uk/2023/bitcoin-electricity-consumption/.
 16. Ethereum, “The Merge,” September 8, 2023, https://ethereum.org/en/roadmap/merge/.
 17. Vitalik Buterin, “Ethereum Whitepaper: A Next-Generation Smart Contract and
 Decentralized 
Application 
https://ethereum.org/en/whitepaper/.
 Platform” 
(white 
paper, 
2013),
 18. Note that Bitcoin also has its own built-in programming language but only as a very
 limited form of scripting language that is not Turing complete.
 19. Primavera De Filippi, Chris Wray, and Giovanni Sileno, “Smart Contracts,” Internet
 Policy Review 10, no. 2 (2021): 1–9.
 20. Nick Szabo, “Smart Contracts: Building Blocks for Digital Markets,” Extropy: The
 Journal of Transhumanist Thought 16, no. 18 (1996): 2–20.
21. Davidson, De Filippi, and Potts, “Economic Institutions of Capitalism,” 644.
 22. Chiu, Crypto Economy, 112.
 23. Jaya Klara Brekke and Aron Fischer, “Digital Scarcity,” Internet Policy Review 10, no. 2
 (2021): 1–9.
 24. However, it should be noted that all exchanges that allow for swaps between
 cryptocurrencies and traditional fiat currencies are centralized.
 25. Examples include UNI tokens necessary to trade on the Uniswap exchange, PNK tokens
 enabling people to appeal to the Kleros decentralized arbitration system, and MANA
 tokens necessary to buy land on the Decentraland blockchain-based metaverse.
 26. Steven Lalley and Glen Weyl, “Quadratic Voting: How Mechanism Design Can
 Radicalize Democracy,” AEA Papers and Proceedings 108 (2018): 33–37.
 27. Morshed Mannan, “The Promise and Perils of Corporate Governance-by-Design in
 Blockchain-Based Collectives: The Case of dOrg,” in Co-Operation and Co-Operatives in
 21st Century Europe, ed. Julian Manley, Anthony Webster, and Olga Kuznetsova (Bristol:
 Bristol University Press, 2023), 78–99.
 28. Finck, Blockchain Regulation, 198.
 29. Nick Szabo, “The Idea of Smart Contracts,” Nick Szabo’s Papers and Concise Tutorials 6,
 no. 1 (1997): 199.
 30. Shermin Voshmgir, “Disrupting Governance with Blockchains and Smart Contracts,”
 Strategic Change 26, no. 5 (2017): 499–509.
 31. Vitalik Buterin, “DAOs, DACs, DAs and More: An Incomplete Terminology Guide,”
 Ethereum Foundation Blog, May 6, 2014, https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/05/06/daos-dacs
das-and-more-an-incomplete-terminology-guide.
 32. Samer Hassan and Primavera De Filippi, “Decentralized Autonomous Organization,”
 Internet Policy Review 10, no. 2 (2021): 1–10.
 33. Davidson, De Filippi, and Potts, “Economic Institutions of Capitalism,” 656.
 34. Primavera De Filippi, “Citizenship in the Era of Blockchain-Based Virtual Nations,” in
 Debating Transformations of National Citizenship, ed. Rainer Baubock (Cham,
 Switzerland: Springer, 2018), 267–277.
 35. Balaji Srinivasan, The Network State: How to Start a New Country (self-pub., Amazon
 Kindle, 2022), 9.
Chapter 3
 1. John Perry Barlow, “A Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace,” Duke Law &
 Technology Review 18 (2019): 5.
 2. Barlow, “A Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace,” 5.
 3. For instance, many online platforms use digital right management systems to restrict access
 to digital content beyond what is usually provided for by national copyright laws. See, for
 example, Pamela Samuelson, “DRM {and, or, vs.} the Law,” Communications of the ACM
 46, no. 4 (2003): 41–45.
 4. Online platforms have repeatedly violated data protection and privacy laws due to the
 manner in which they collect user data in order to profile them and/or sell personal
 information to third-party advertisers (e.g., the Facebook-Cambridge Analytica scandal).
 See, for example, Jim Isaak and Mina Hanna, “User Data Privacy: Facebook, Cambridge
 Analytica, and Privacy Protection,” Computer 51, no. 8 (2018): 56–59.
 5. Lawrence Lessig, Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace (New York: Basic Books 1999),
 102.
 6. 
Lawrence 
Lessig, 
“Code 
Is 
Law,” 
Harvard 
https://www.harvardmagazine.com/2000/01/code-is-law-html.
 Magazine 
1 
(2000),
 7. Vili Lehdonvirta, Cloud Empires: How Digital Platforms Are Overtaking the State and
 How We Can Regain Control (Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 2022), 126.
 8. Frank Pasquale, “From Territorial to Functional Sovereignty: The Case of Amazon,” Open
 Democracy, January 5, 2018, https://www.opendemocracy.net/en/digitaliberties/from
territorial-to-functional-sovereignty-case-of-amazon/.
 9. Cédric Durand, Technoféodalisme: Critique de l’économie numérique (Paris: Zones, 2020),
 179.
 10. Shoshana Zuboff, The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at
 the New Frontier of Power (London: Profile Books, 2019, 4.
 11. Evgeny Morozov, “Critique of Technofeudal Reason,” New Left Review 133/134
 (January/April 2022): 89–126.
 12. Morozov, “Critique of Techno-Feudal Reason,” 97.
 13. Tom Bingham, The Rule of Law (London: Penguin, 2011), 5.
 14. Tom Ginsburg and Tamir Moustafa, Rule by Law: The Politics of Courts in Authoritarian
 Regimes (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2018), 12.
 15. David Lyon, “Surveillance, Snowden, and Big Data: Capacities, Consequences, Critique,”
 Big Data & Society 1, no. 2 (July–December 2014): 1–13.
 16. Michael McGinnis, “Polycentric Governance in Theory and Practice: Dimensions of
 Aspiration and Practical Limitations” (working paper, Department of Political Science,
 Indiana 
University 
Bloomington, 
https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3812455.
 Bloomington, 
IN, 
February 
2016), 
4,
 17. Eric Alston et al., “Can Permissionless Blockchains Avoid Governance and the Law?,”
 Notre Dame Journal on Emerging Technology 2, no. 1 (March 2021): 1–32.
18. Paul Aligica and Vlad Tarko, “Polycentricity: From Polanyi to Ostrom, and Beyond,”
 Governance: An International Journal of Policy, Administration, and Institutions 25, no. 2
 (April 2012): 245.
 19. Jeremy Waldron, “The Rule of Law and the Importance of Procedure,” Nomos 50 (2011):
 4–5.
 20. Primavera de Filippi, Morshed Mannan, and Wessel Reijers, “Blockchain as a Confidence
 Machine: The Problem of Trust and Challenges of Governance,” Technology in Society 62
 (August 2020): 101284, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101284.
 21. Lana Swartz, “Blockchain Dreams: Imagining Techno-Economic Alternatives after
 Bitcoin,” in Another Economy Is Possible: Culture and Economy in a Time of Crisis, ed.
 Manuel Castells (Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2017), 94.
 22. Curtis Goldsby and Marvin Hanisch, “The Boon and Bane of Blockchain: Getting the
 Governance Right,” California Management Review 64, no. 3 (2022): 141–168.
 Literature 
23. Ashish Rajendra Sai, et al., “Taxonomy of Centralization in Public Blockchain Systems: A
 Systematic 
Review” 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2009.12542.
 (working 
paper, 
September 
2020),
 24. Council Regulation (EU) 2023/1114 on Markets in Crypto-Assets, and amending
 regulations (EU) no. 1093/2010 and (EU) no. 1095/2010 and directives 2013/36/EU and
 (EU) 2019/1937, 2023 O.J. (L 150/40) 40 (“MiCA Regulation”).
 25. MiCA Regulation: recital 12a.
 26. Angela Walch, “In Code(rs) We Trust: Software Developers as Fiduciaries in Public
 Blockchains” in Regulating Blockchain: Techno-Social and Legal Challenges, ed. Philipp
 Hacker et al. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2019), 59.
 27. Tulip Trading Limited v. Bitcoin Association for BSV & Ors [2022] EWHC 667 (Ch)
 (March 25, 2022), para 75.
 28. See the example of the developer arrested in connection with the Tornado Cash case
 (chapter 6).
 29. Evan Miller, “A Tale of Two Regulators: Antitrust Implications of Progressive
 Decentralization in Blockchain Platforms,” Washington & Lee Law Review Online 77, no.
 2 (2021): 388–409.
 30. Mireille Hildebrandt, “Algorithmic Regulation and the Rule of Law,” Philosophical
 Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences
 376, no. 2128 (September 2018): 1–11.
 31. Karen Yeung, “Regulation by Blockchain: The Emerging Battle for Supremacy between
 the Code of Law and Code as Law,” Modern Law Review 82, no. 2 (2019): 210.
 32. See, for example, the complaint filed on September 22, 2022 in Commodity Futures
 Trading Commission v. Ooki DAO (formerly d/b/a bZx DAO), an Unincorporated
 Association, Civil Action No: 3:22-cv-5416 alleging that the governance token-holders of
 Ooki DAO, as members of an unincorporated association, had violated commodities
 regulations and were thus jointly and severally liable for this violation.
Chapter 4
 1. Herman Melville, The Confidence Man (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1984),
 102.
 2. Lana Swartz, “Theorizing the 2017 Blockchain ICO Bubble as a Network Scam,” New
 Media and Society 24, no. 7 (2022): 1696. Swartz, in her analysis of ICOs, similarly draws
 from Melville’s work as a “foundational text for understanding scams in modernity.”
 3. Melville, The Confidence Man, 3.
 4. Georg Simmel, “The Stranger,” in The Cultural Geography Reader, ed. Tim Oakes and
 Patricia L. Price (New York: Routledge, 2008), 311–315.
 5. Josh Lauer, Creditworthy: A History of Consumer Surveillance and Financial Identity in
 America (New York: Columbia University Press, 2017), 105.
 6. Johannes D. Bergmann, “The Original Confidence Man,” American Quarterly 21, no. 3
 (1969): 561.
 7. Bergmann, “The Original Confidence Man,” 565.
 8. A. P. Martinich, “Two Uses of Thomas Hobbes’s Philosophy in Melville’s The Confidence
Man,” ANQ: A Quarterly Journal of Short Articles, Notes and Reviews 16, no. 3 (January
 2003): 37–40.
 9. Frans de Waal, Primates and Philosophers (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2006),
 4.
 10. Michael Tomasello, Why We Cooperate (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009), xiii.
 11. Samuel Bowles and Herbert Gintis, A Cooperative Species: Human Reciprocity and Its
 Evolution (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001), 200.
 12. Niklas Luhmann, “Familiarity, Confidence, Trust: Problems and Alternatives,” in Trust:
 Making and Breaking Cooperative Relations, ed. Diego Gambetta (Oxford: Oxford
 University Press, 2000), 94–107.
 13. Philip Pettit, “The Cunning of Trust,” Philosophy & Public Affairs 24, no. 3 (1995): 202
225.
 14. Russell Hardin, Trust & Trustworthiness (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2004), 1.
 15. Denis J. Roio, “Bitcoin, the End of the Taboo on Money,” Dyne.Org Digital Press, April
 6, 2013, 1–17.
 16. Gili Vidan and Vili Lehdonvirta, “Mine the Gap: Bitcoin and the Maintenance of
 Trustlessness,” New Media and Society 21, no. 1 (January 2019): 42–59.
 17. Finck, Blockchain Regulation, 183.
 18. De Filippi, Mannan, and Reijers, “Blockchain as a Confidence Machine.”
 19. Nick Szabo, “Money, Blockchains, and Social Scalability,” Unenumerated, February 9,
 2017, 
http://unenumerated.blogspot.com/2017/02/money-blockchains-and-social
scalability.html.
 20. Michael Lapointe, “The Edison of the Slot Machines,” Paris Review February 4, 2020,
 https://www.theparisreview.org/blog/2020/02/04/the-edison-of-the-slot-machines/.
21. Tim Copeland, “Steem vs Tron: The Rebellion against a Cryptocurrency Empire,”
 Decrypt, August 18, 2020, https://decrypt.co/38050/steem-steemit-tron-justin-sun
cryptocurrency-war.
 22. Barbara Guidi, Andrea Michienzi, and Laura Ricci, “Analysis of Witnesses in the Steem
 Blockchain,” Mobile Networks and Applications 26, no. 5 (October 2021): 2099–2110.
 23. The ninjamined stake refers to an amount of cryptocurrency that was mined by two of the
 founders of Steem who launched the network earlier than the agreed date. This gave them a
 head start in mining the native tokens, which would represent 30 percent of the network’s
 total token supply at a later point, when Justin Sun bought the stake for USD 8 million.
 24. Copeland, “Steem vs Tron.”
 25. Christopher Harland-Dunaway, “The Many Escapes of Justin Sun,” The Verge, March 9,
 2022, https://www.theverge.com/c/22947663/justin-sun-tron-cryptocurrency-poloniex.
Chapter 5
 1. Carl Schmitt, Political Theology: Four Chapters on the Concept of Sovereignty (Chicago:
 University of Chicago Press, 2005), 15.
 2. John M. Coetzee, Waiting for the Barbarians (New York: Penguin Books, 1999), 4.
 3. C. P. Cavafy, Collected Poems, ed. George Savidis, trans. Edmund Keeley and Philip
 Sherrard, rev. ed. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992), 20.
 4. Coetzee, Waiting for the Barbarians, 177.
 5. Carl Schmitt was and remains controversial because of his involvement in the Nazi party as
 a prominent and unapologetic member, as well as the resonance between his political and
 legal ideas and the authoritarian politics of Nazi Germany.
 6. Schmitt, Political Theology, 5.
 7. Nassim N. Taleb, The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable (London: Random
 House, 2017), xviii.
 8. Hans Kelsen, Pure Theory of Law (Clark, NJ: The Lawbook Exchange, 2005), 3.
 9. Schmitt, Political Theology, 48.
 10. Quinn Dupont, “Experiments in Algorithmic Governance: A History and Ethnography of
 ‘The DAO,’ a Failed Decentralized Autonomous Organization,” in Bitcoin and Beyond, ed.
 Malcolm Campbell-Verduyn (New York: Routledge, 2017), 157–177.
 11. Kelsen, Pure Theory of Law, 194.
 12. Kelsen, Pure Theory of Law, 202.
 13. Francis Ghilès, “France’s Permanent State of Emergency.” Barcelona Center for
 International Affairs 502 (2017): 1–2.
 14. David Dyzenhaus, Legality and Legitimacy: Carl Schmitt, Hans Kelsen and Herman
 Heller in Weimar (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997), 5.
 15. Coetzee, Waiting for the Barbarians, 7.
 16. David Dyzenhaus, “Now the Machine Runs Itself,” Cardozo Law Review 16, no. 1
 (1994): 10.
 17. Vitalik Buterin, “Critical Update Re: DAO Vulnerability,” Ethereum Foundation Blog,
 June 17, 2016, https://blog.ethereum.org/2016/06/17/critical-update-re-dao-vulnerability.
 18. The Attacker, “An Open Letter,” https://pastebin.com/CcGUBgDG.
 19. Clinton Rossiter, Constitutional Dictatorship: Crisis Government in the Modern
 Democracies (New York: Routledge, 1948), 290.
Chapter 6
 1. Quoted from Paul Eltzbacher, Anarchism (New York: Benjamin R. Tucker, 1908), 129.
 2. Srinivasan, The Network State, 9.
 3. Srinivasan, The Network State, 234.
 4. Gavin Wood. “Allegality: Systems That Can’t Care,” YouTube video, 26:30, May 14, 2015,
 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zh9BxYTSrGU.
 5. Laura Shin, The Cryptopians: Idealism, Greed, Lies, and the Making of the First Big
 Cryptocurrency Craze (New York: PublicAffairs, 2022), chapter 5, Kindle.
 6. Vanja Hamzić, “Alegality: Outside and Beyond the Legal Logic of Late Capitalism,” in
 Neoliberal Legality: Understanding the Role of Law in the Neoliberal Project, ed. Honor
 Brabazon (Abingdon: Routledge, 2017), 191.
 7. Hans Lindahl, “We and Cyberlaw: The Spatial Unity of Constitutional Orders,” Indiana
 Journal of Global Legal Studies 20, no. 2 (2013): 730.
 8. Hans Lindahl, Authority and the Globalisation of Inclusion and Exclusion (Cambridge,
 UK: Cambridge University Press, 2018), 60.
 9. Hans Lindahl, “A-Legality: Postnationalism and the Question of Legal Boundaries,”
 Modern Law Review 73, no. 1 (2010): 35.
 10. Lindahl, Authority, 143–144.
 11. Hans Lindahl, Fault Lines of Globalization: Legal Order and the Politics of A-Legality
 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), 21.
 12. Carys Hughes, “Action between the Legal and the Illegal: A-Legality as a Political–Legal
 Strategy,” Social & Legal Studies 28, no. 4 (2019): 472.
 13. Hans Lindahl, “Inside and Outside Global Law,” Sydney Law Review 41, no. 1 (2019): 18.
 14. Lindahl, “Inside and Outside,” 22.
 15. Alexander Behrens, “‘Not Your Keys; Not Your Coins’ Enshrined in US Case Law, Says
 Lawyer,” Decrypt, August 23, 2020, https://decrypt.co/39574/not-your-keys-not-your
coins-enshrined-in-us-case-law-says-lawyer.
 16. Langdon Winner, “Do Artifacts Have Politics?” Daedalus 109, no. 1 (Winter 1980): 123.
 17. Primavera de Filippi, Morshed Mannan, and Wessel Reijers, “The Alegality of Blockchain
 Technology,” Policy and Society 41, no. 3 (2022): 359.
 18. Tornado Cash, “Tornado.cash Is Finally Trustless!” Medium, May 20, 2022,
 https://tornado-cash.medium.com/tornado-cash-is-finally-trustless-a6e119c1d1c2.
 19. Joseph van Loon v. Department of Treasury, 1:23-CV-312-RP (W.D.Tex. Aug. 17, 2023).
 20. Jerry Brito and Peter van Valkenburgh, “Analysis: What Is and What Is Not a
 Sanctionable Entity in the Tornado Cash Case,” Coin Center, August 15, 2022,
 https://www.coincenter.org/analysis-what-is-and-what-is-not-a-sanctionable-entity-in-the
tornado-cash-case/.
 21. Henry Farrell and Bruce Schneier, “Tornado Cash Is Not Free Speech. It Is a Golem,”
 Lawfare, October 13, 2022, https://www.lawfaremedia.org/article/tornado-cash-not-free
speech-its-golem.
 22. Eltzbacher, Anarchism, 129.
Chapter 7
 1. Vitalik Buterin, “The Most Important Scarce Resource Is Legitimacy,” Vitalik.ca, March
 23, 
2021,
 https://web.archive.org/web/20230324211049/https://vitalik.ca/general/2021/03/23/legitim
 acy.html.
 2. Vitalik Buterin, “The Most Important Scarce Resource Is Legitimacy.”
 3. Roger Cotterrell, Law’s Community: Legal Theory in Sociological Perspective (Oxford:
 Oxford University Press, 1997), 136.
 4. Dyzenhaus, Legality and Legitimacy, 1–2.
 5. Dyzenhaus, Legality and Legitimacy, 246, 254.
 6. Mikolaj Barczentewicz, Alex Sarch, and Natasha Vasan, “Blockchain Transaction Ordering
 as Market Manipulation,” Ohio State Technology Law Journal 20 (forthcoming), 6,
 http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4187752.
 7. Barczentewicz, Sarch, and Vasan, “Blockchain Transaction Ordering,” 47.
 8. Ross Mittiga, “Political Legitimacy, Authoritarianism, and Climate Change,” American
 Political Science Review 116, no. 3 (August 2022): 1001.
 9. Allen Buchanan, “Political Legitimacy and Democracy,” Ethics 112, no. 4 (2002): 703.
 10. Mittiga, “Political Legitimacy,” 1001–1002.
 11. De Filippi, Mannan, and Reijers, “Confidence Machine,” 6.
 12. De Filippi, Mannan, and Reijers, “Confidence Machine,” 12.
 13. Buchanan, “Political Legitimacy,” 703.
 2022, 
14. Nathan Schneider, “How We Can Encode Human Rights in the Blockchain,” Noema, June
 7, 
https://www.noemamag.com/how-we-can-encode-human-rights-in-the
blockchain/.
 15. Ellie Rennie, “Climate Change and the Legitimacy of Bitcoin” (working paper, January
 2023), 6–9, https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3961105.
 16. Adam French, “Regenerative Web 3—The Landscape, Opportunities, and Entry Point,”
 Gitcoin Blog, January 16, 2023, https://www.gitcoin.co/blog/regenerative-web-3-the
landscape-opportunities-and-entry-points.
 Gov. 
17. Greg Ahlstrand, “New York Imposes 2-Year Moratorium on New Proof-of-Work Mining
 after 
Hochul 
Signs 
Bill,” 
CoinDesk, 
November 
23, 
2022,
 https://www.coindesk.com/policy/2022/11/23/new-york-imposes-2-year-moratorium-on
new-proof-of-work-mining-after-governor-hochul-signs-bill-into-law/.
 18. Vivien Schmidt, Europe’s Crisis of Legitimacy: Governing by Rules and Ruling by
 Numbers in the Eurozone (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2020), 25.
 19. Julia Black, “Constructing and Contesting Legitimacy and Accountability in Polycentric
 Regulatory Regimes,” Regulation & Governance 2, no. 2 (June 2008): 144.
 20. Shruti Rajagopalan, “Blockchain and Buchanan: Code as Constitution,” in James M.
 Buchanan: A Theorist of Political Economy and Social Philosophy, ed. Richard Wagner
 (Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan, 2018), 377.
21. Russell Hardin, “Why a Constitution?,” in Social and Political Foundations of
 Constitutions, ed. Denis J. Galligan and Mila Versteeg (Cambridge: Cambridge University
 Press, 2013), 51.
 22. Tobias Mahler, Generic Top-Level Domains: A Study of Transnational Private Regulation
 (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2019), 40.
 23. Angelo Golia, “The Transformative Potential of Meta’s Oversight Board: Strategic
 Litigation within the Digital Constitution?” Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies 30
 (forthcoming), 9, https://ssrn.com/abstract=4401086.
 24. Giovanni de Gregorio, “Digital Constitutionalism across the Atlantic,” Global
 Constitutionalism 11, no. 2 (2022): 317; Nicolas Suzor, “Digital Constitutionalism: Using
 the Rule of Law to Evaluate the Legitimacy of Governance by Platforms,” Social Media +
 Society 4, no. 3 (July–September 2018): 5–7.
 25. Eric Alston, “Constitutions and Blockchains: Competitive Governance of Fundamental
 Rule Sets,” Journal of Law, Technology & the Internet 11, no. 5 (2020): 134; Rajagopalan,
 “Blockchain and Buchanan,” 366–367.
 26. Alston, “Constitutions and Blockhains,” 151.
 27. Ferdinand Lassalle, “On the Essence of Constitutions,” Fourth International 3, no. 1
 (1942): 25–31, https://www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/fi/vol03/no01/lassalle.htm.
 28. ENS, “ENS DAO Constitution,” ENS Documentation, accessed December 22, 2023,
 https://docs.ens.domains/v/governance/ens-dao-constitution.
 29. Joshua Tan et al., “Constitutions of Web3” (working paper, September 2023),
 https://constitutions.metagov.org/article.
 30. Eric Alston et al., “Blockchain Networks as Constitutional and Competitive Polycentric
 Orders,” Journal of Institutional Economics 18, no. 5 (October 2022): 721.
Chapter 8
 1. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, The Social Contract (Hertfordshire: Wordsworth Editions Limited,
 1998), 5.
 2. Hannu Rajaniemi, “Unchained: A Story of Love, Loss, and Blockchain,” MIT Technology
 Review, 
April 
25, 
2018,
 https://www.technologyreview.com/2018/04/25/143469/unchained-a-story-of-love-loss
and-blockchain/.
 OceanofPDF.com
Bibliography
 Ahlstrand, Greg. “New York Imposes 2-Year Moratorium on New
 Proof-of-Work Mining after Gov. Hochul Signs Bill.” CoinDesk,
 November 
23, 
2022.
 https://www.coindesk.com/policy/2022/11/23/new-york-imposes-2
year-moratorium-on-new-proof-of-work-mining-after-governor
hochul-signs-bill-into-law/.
 Aligica, Paul, and Vlad Tarko. “Polycentricity: From Polanyi to
 Ostrom, and Beyond.” Governance: An International Journal of
 Policy, Administration, and Institutions 25, no. 2 (April 2012): 237
262.
 Alston, 
Eric. 
“Constitutions 
and 
Blockchains: 
Competitive
 Governance of Fundamental Rule Sets.” Journal of Law, Technology
 & the Internet 11, no. 5 (2020): 131–171.
 Alston, Eric, Wilson Law, Ilia Murtazashvili, and Martin Weiss. “Can
 Permissionless Blockchains Avoid Governance and the Law?” Notre
 Dame Journal on Emerging Technology 2, no. 1 (March 2021): 1
32.
 Alston, Eric, Wilson Law, Ilia Murtazashvili, and Martin Weiss.
 “Blockchain Networks as Constitutional and Competitive
 Polycentric Orders.” Journal of Institutional Economics 18, no. 5
 (October 2022): 707–723.
 Arendt, Hannah. “The Modern Concept of History.” Review of Politics
 20, no. 4 (October 1958): 570–590.
 Aristotle. Politics. Edited and translated by C. D. C. Reeve.
 Cambridge, MA: Hackett Publishing Company, 1998.
 The Attacker. “An Open Letter.” https://pastebin.com/CcGUBgDG.
 Bakunin, Mikhail. “Man, Society and Freedom.” In Bakunin on
 Anarchy: Selected Works by the Activist-Founder of World, edited by
 Sam Dolgoff, 234–242. New York: Vintage Book, 1971.
Barczentewicz, Mikolaj, Alex Sarch, and Natasha Vasan. “Blockchain
 Transaction Ordering as Market Manipulation.” Ohio State
 Technology Law Journal 20 (forthcoming): 6.
 Barlow, John Perry. “A Declaration of the Independence of
 Cyberspace.” Duke Law & Technology Review 18 (2019): 5–7.
 Behrens, Alexander. “‘Not Your Keys; Not Your Coins’ Enshrined in
 US Case Law, Says Lawyer.” Decrypt, August 23, 2020.
 https://decrypt.co/39574/not-your-keys-not-your-coins-enshrined-in
us-case-law-says-lawyer.
 Bergmann, Johannes D. “The Original Confidence Man.” American
 Quarterly 21, no. 3 (1969): 560–577.
 Bingham, Tom. The Rule of Law. London: Penguin, 2011.
 Black, Julia. “Constructing and Contesting Legitimacy and
 Accountability in Polycentric Regulatory Regimes.” Regulation &
 Governance 2, no. 2 (June 2008): 137–164.
 Bowles, Samuel, and Herbert Gintis. A Cooperative Species: Human
 Reciprocity and Its Evolution. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
 2001.
 Brekke, Jaya Klara, and Aron Fischer. “Digital Scarcity.” Internet
 Policy Review 10, no. 2 (2021): 1–9.
 Brito, Jerry, and van Valkenburgh, Peter, “Analysis: What Is and What
 Is Not a Sanctionable Entity in the Tornado Cash Case.” Coin
 Center, August 15, 2022. https://www.coincenter.org/analysis-what
is-and-what-is-not-a-sanctionable-entity-in-the-tornado-cash-case/.
 Brunton, Finn. Digital Cash: The Unknown History of the Anarchists,
 Utopians, and Technologists Who Created Cryptocurrency.
 Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2020.
 Buchanan, Allen. “Political Legitimacy and Democracy.” Ethics 112,
 no. 4 (2002): 689–719.
 Buterin, Vitalik. “Critical Update Re: DAO Vulnerability.” Ethereum
 Foundation 
Blog, 
June 
17, 
https://blog.ethereum.org/2016/06/17/critical-update-re-dao
vulnerability.
 2016.
Buterin, Vitalik. “DAOs, DACs, DAs and More: An Incomplete
 Terminology Guide.” Ethereum Foundation Blog, May 6, 2014.
 https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/05/06/daos-dacs-das-and-more-an
incomplete-terminology-guide.
 Buterin, Vitalik. “Ethereum Whitepaper: A Next-Generation Smart
 Contract and Decentralized Application Platform.” White paper,
 2013. https://ethereum.org/en/whitepaper/.
 Buterin, Vitalik. “The Most Important Scarce Resource Is Legitimacy.”
 Vitalik.ca, 
March 
23, 
2021.
 https://web.archive.org/web/20230324211049/https://vitalik.ca/gene
 ral/2021/03/23/legitimacy.html.
 Carugati, Federica, and Nathan Schneider. “Governance Archeology:
 Research as Ancestry.” Daedalus 152, no. 1 (Winter 2023): 245
257. https://doi.org/10.1162/daed_a_01985.
 Cavafy, Constantine P. Collected Poems. Edited by George Savidis and
 translated by Edmund Keeley and Philip Sherrard. Rev. ed.
 Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992.
 Chio, Ka. “Rule of Law or Rule by Law? A Brief Analysis of China’s
 Legal System.” International Relations Journal 33 (Spring 2014):
 29–43.
 Chiu, Iris. Regulating the Crypto Economy: Business Transformations
 and Financialisation. Oxford: Hart Publishing, 2021.
 Coetzee, John M. Waiting for the Barbarians. New York: Penguin
 Books, 1999.
 Copeland, Tim. “Steem vs Tron: The Rebellion against a
 Cryptocurrency 
Empire.” 
Decrypt, 
August 
https://decrypt.co/38050/steem-steemit-tron-justin-sun
cryptocurrency-war.
 18, 
2020.
 Cotterrell, Roger. Law’s Community: Legal Theory in Sociological
 Perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997.
 Craib, Raymond. Adventure Capitalism: A History of Libertarian Exit,
 from the Era of Decolonization to the Digital Age. New York: PM
 Press, 2022.
 Davidson, Sinclair, Primavera De Filippi, and Jason Potts.
 “Blockchains and the Economic Institutions of Capitalism.” Journal
of Institutional Economics 14, no. 4 (2018): 639–658.
 Davidson, Sinclair, and Jason Potts. “Corporate Governance in a
 Crypto-World.” 
Working 
paper, 
https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4099906.
 May 
2022.
 De Filippi, Primavera, and Benjamin Loveluck. “The Invisible Politics
 of Bitcoin: Governance Crisis of a Decentralized Infrastructure.”
 Internet 
Policy 
Review 
5, 
no. 
4 
(2016).
 https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2852691.
 De Filippi, Primavera. “Citizenship in the Era of Blockchain-Based
 Virtual Nations.” In Debating Transformations of National
 Citizenship, 
edited 
by 
Switzerland: Springer, 2018.
 Rainer Baubock, 267–278 Cham,
 De Filippi, Primavera, Morshed Mannan, and Wessel Reijers.
 “Blockchain as a Confidence Machine: The Problem of Trust and
 Challenges of Governance.” Technology in Society 62 (August
 2020): 101284. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101284.
 De Filippi, Primavera, Chris Wray, and Giovanni Sileno. “Smart
 Contracts.” Internet Policy Review 10, no. 2 (2021): 1–9.
 De Filippi, Primavera, Morshed Mannan, and Wessel Reijers. “The
 Alegality of Blockchain Technology.” Policy and Society 41, no. 3
 (2022): 358–372.
 De Waal, Frans. Primates and Philosophers. Princeton: Princeton
 University Press, 2006.
 Dupont, Quinn. “Experiments in Algorithmic Governance: A History
 and Ethnography of ‘The DAO,’ a Failed Decentralized
 Autonomous Organization.” In Bitcoin and Beyond, edited by
 Malcolm Campbell-Verduyn, 157–177. New York: Routledge, 2017.
 Durand, Cédric. Technoféodalisme: Critique de l’économie numérique.
 Paris: Zones, 2020.
 Dyzenhaus, David. Legality and Legitimacy: Carl Schmitt, Hans
 Kelsen and Herman Heller in Weimar. Oxford: Oxford University
 Press, 1997.
 Dyzenhaus, David. “Now the Machine Runs Itself.” Cardozo Law
 Review 16, no. 1 (1994): 1–19.
Eltzbacher, Paul. Anarchism. New York: Benjamin R. Tucker, 1908.
 Ethereum. 
“The 
Merge.” 
September 
https://ethereum.org/en/roadmap/merge/.
 Is 
a 
8, 
2023.
 Farrell, Henry, and Bruce Schneier. “Tornado Cash Is Not Free Speech.
 It 
Golem.” 
Lawfare, 
October 
13, 
2022.
 https://www.lawfaremedia.org/article/tornado-cash-not-free-speech
its-golem.
 Finck, Michèle. Blockchain Regulation and Governance in Europe.
 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2018.
 Finney, Hal. “Re: Many Worlds Theory of Immortality.” Email
 Message to Extropians Mailing List, May 9, 2005.
 https://riceissa.github.io/everything-list-1998-2009/6431.html.
 Entry 
French, Adam. “Regenerative Web 3—The Landscape, Opportunities,
 and 
Point.” 
Gitcoin 
Blog, 
January 
16, 
2023.
 https://www.gitcoin.co/blog/regenerative-web-3-the-landscape
opportunities-and-entry-points.
 Fukuyama, Francis. The End of History and the Last Man. New York:
 The Free Press, 1992.
 Gambetta, Diego. “Can We Trust Trust?” In Trust: Making and
 Breaking Cooperative Relations, edited by Diego Gambetta, 213
237. Oxford: University of Oxford Press, 2000.
 Gibson, William. Neuromancer. New York: Ace Books, 1994.
 Ginsburg, Tom, and Tamir Moustafa. Rule by Law: The Politics of
 Courts in Authoritarian Regimes. Cambridge: Cambridge University
 Press, 2018.
 Ghilès, Francis. “France’s Permanent State of Emergency.” Barcelona
 Center for International Affairs 502 (2017): 1–2.
 & 
GlobalData. “Bitcoin Market Capitalisation History.” GlobalData:
 Data 
Insights, 
September 
https://www.globaldata.com/data-insights/financial
services/bitcoins-market-capitalization-history.
 15, 
2023.
 Goldsby, Curtis, and Marvin Hanisch. “The Boon and Bane of
 Blockchain: 
Getting 
the 
Governance 
Right.” 
Management Review 64, no. 3 (2022): 141–168.
 California
Golia, Angelo. “The Transformative Potential of Meta’s Oversight
 Board: Strategic Litigation within the Digital Constitution?” Indiana
 Journal 
of 
Global 
Legal 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4401086.
 Studies 
30 
(forthcoming).
 Graeber, David, and David Wengrow. The Dawn of Everything: A New
 History of Humanity. London: Penguin, 2022.
 Gregorio, Giovanni de. “Digital Constitutionalism across the Atlantic,”
 Global Constitutionalism 11, no. 2 (2022): 297–324.
 Guidi, Barbara, Andrea Michienzi, and Laura Ricci. “Analysis of
 Witnesses in the Steem Blockchain.” Mobile Networks and
 Applications 
26, 
no. 
5 
(October 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11036-021-01749-x.
 2021): 
2099–2110.
 Hamzić, Vanja. “Alegality: Outside and Beyond the Legal Logic of
 Late Capitalism.” In Neoliberal Legality: Understanding the Role of
 Law in the Neoliberal Project, edited by Honor Brabazon, 190–209.
 Abingdon: Routledge, 2017.
 Hardin, Russell. Trust & Trustworthiness. New York: Russell Sage
 Foundation, 2004.
 Hardin, Russell. “Why a Constitution?” In Social and Political
 Foundations of Constitutions, edited by Denis J. Galligan and Mila
 Versteeg, 51–72. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
 Harland-Dunaway, Christopher. “The Many Escapes of Justin Sun.”
 The 
Verge, 
March 
9, 
https://www.theverge.com/c/22947663/justin-sun-tron
cryptocurrency-poloniex.
 2022.
 Hassan, Samer, and Primavera De Filippi. “Decentralized Autonomous
 Organization.” Internet Policy Review 10, no. 2 (2021): 1–10.
 https://policyreview.info/glossary/DAO.
 Heinlein, Robert. Double Star. New York: Doubleday & Co., 1956.
 Hildebrandt, Mireille. “Algorithmic Regulation and the Rule of Law.”
 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
 Physical and Engineering Sciences 376, no. 2128 (September
 2018): 1–11.
 Hughes, Carys. “Action between the Legal and the Illegal: A-Legality
 as a Political–Legal Strategy.” Social & Legal Studies 28, no. 4
(2019): 470–492. https://doi.org/10.1177/0964663918791009.
 Isaak, Jim, and Mina J. Hanna. “User Data Privacy: Facebook,
 Cambridge Analytica, and Privacy Protection.” Computer 51, no. 8
 (2018): 56–59.
 Jennings, Chris. Paradise Now: The Story of American Utopianism.
 New York: Random House, 2016. Kindle.
 Kelsen, Hans. Pure Theory of Law. Clark: The Lawbook Exchange,
 2005.
 Lalley, Steven, and Glen Weyl. “Quadratic Voting: How Mechanism
 Design Can Radicalize Democracy.” AEA Papers and Proceedings
 108 (2018): 33–37.
 Lapointe, Michael. “The Edison of the Slot Machines.” Paris Review,
 February 
4, 
2020.
 https://www.theparisreview.org/blog/2020/02/04/the-edison-of-the
slot-machines/.
 Lassalle, Ferdinand. “On the Essence of Constitutions.” Fourth
 International 
3, 
no. 
1 
(1942): 
25–31.
 https://www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/fi/vol03/no01/lassal
 le.htm.
 Lauer, Josh. Creditworthy: A History of Consumer Surveillance and
 Financial Identity in America. New York: Columbia University
 Press, 2017.
 Lehdonvirta, Vili. Cloud Empires: How Digital Platforms Are
 Overtaking the State and How We Can Regain Control. Cambridge
 MA: MIT Press, 2022.
 Lehdonvirta, Vili. “The Blockchain Paradox: Why Distributed Ledger
 Technologies May Do Little to Transform the Economy.” Oxford
 Internet 
Institute 
Blog, 
November 
21, 
2016.
 https://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/news-events/news/the-blockchain-paradox
why-distributed-ledger-technologies-may-do-little-to-transform-the
economy/.
 Lessig, Lawrence. Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace. New York:
 Basic Books, 1999.
 Lessig, Lawrence. “Code Is Law.” Harvard Magazine 1 (2000).
Lindahl, Hans. “A-Legality: Postnationalism and the Question of
 Legal Boundaries.” Modern Law Review 73, no. 1 (2010): 30–56.
 Lindahl, Hans. Fault Lines of Globalization: Legal Order and the
 Politics of A-Legality. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013.
 Lindahl, Hans. “We and Cyberlaw: The Spatial Unity of Constitutional
 Orders.” Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies 20, no. 2 (2013):
 697–730.
 Lindahl, Hans. Authority and the Globalisation of Inclusion and
 Exclusion. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2018.
 Lindahl, Hans. “Inside and Outside Global Law.” Sydney Law Review
 41, no. 1 (2019): 1–34.
 Luhmann, Niklas. “Familiarity, Confidence, Trust: Problems and
 Alternatives.” In Trust: Making and Breaking Cooperative
 Relations, edited by Diego Gambetta, 94–107. Oxford: Oxford
 University Press, 2000.
 Lyon, David. “Surveillance, Snowden, and Big Data: Capacities,
 Consequences, Critique.” Big Data & Society 1, no. 2 (July
December 2014): 1–13.
 Mahler, Tobias. Generic Top-Level Domains: A Study of Transnational
 Private Regulation. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2019.
 Mannan, Morshed. “The Promise and Perils of Corporate Governance
by-Design in Blockchain-Based Collectives: The Case of dOrg.” In
 Co-Operation and Co-Operatives in 21st Century Europe, edited by
 Julian Manley, Anthony Webster, and Olga Kuznetsova, 78–99.
 Bristol: Bristol University Press, 2023.
 Martinich, Aloysius P. “Two Uses of Thomas Hobbes’s Philosophy in
 Melville’s The Confidence-Man.” ANQ: A Quarterly Journal of
 Short Articles, Notes and Reviews 16, no. 3 (January 2003): 37–40.
 https://doi.org/10.1080/08957690309598214.
 May, Timothy. “The Crypto-Anarchist Manifesto.” In Crypto Anarchy,
 Cyberstates, and Pirate Utopias, edited by Peter Ludlow, 61–63.
 Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
 McGinnis, Michael. “Polycentric Governance in Theory and Practice:
 Dimensions of Aspiration and Practical Limitations.” Working
 paper, Department of Political Science, Indiana University
Bloomington, 
Bloomington, 
IN, 
February 
2016.
 https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3812455.
 McLuhan, Marshall. The Gutenberg Galaxy. Toronto: University of
 Toronto Press, 1962.
 Melville, Herman. The Confidence Man. Evanston: Northwestern
 University Press, 1984.
 Miller, Evan. “A Tale of Two Regulators: Antitrust Implications of
 Progressive Decentralization in Blockchain Platforms.” Washington
 & Lee Law Review Online 77, no. 2 (2021): 386–409.
 Mitchell, Lawrence. “Trust and the Overlapping Consensus.”
 Columbia Law Review 94, no. 6 (1994): 1918–1935.
 Mittiga, Ross. “Political Legitimacy, Authoritarianism, and Climate
 Change.” American Political Science Review 116, no. 3 (August
 2022): 998–1011.
 More, Max. “The Extropian Principles” Extropy Magazine 6 (1990):
 17–18.
 More, Max. “The Extropian Principles, Version 3.0: A Transhumanist
 Declaration.” 
Extropy 
Institute, 
https://www.mrob.com/pub/religion/extro_prin.html.
 1998.
 Morozov, Evgeny. “Critique of Techno-Feudal Reason.” New Left
 Review 133/134 (January/April 2022): 89–126.
 Mumford, Lewis. “Utopia, the City and the Machine.” Daedalus 94,
 no. 2 (Spring 1965): 271–292.
 Narayanan, Arvind, and Jeremy Clark. “Bitcoin’s Academic Pedigree.”
 Communications of the ACM 60, no. 12 (2017): 36–45.
 Neumueller, Alexander. “Bitcoin Electricity Consumption: An
 Improved Assessment.” University of Cambridge, Judge Business
 School 
Insights, 
August 
31, 
2023.
 https://www.jbs.cam.ac.uk/2023/bitcoin-electricity-consumption/.
 Orgad, Liav, and Rainer Baubock. “Cloud Communities: The Dawn of
 Global Citizenship?” RSCAS Working Paper 2018/28, Robert
 Schuman Centre for Advanced Studies, European University
 Institute, Fiesole, Italy, 2018. https://hdl.handle.net/1814/55464.
 Palmer, Ada. Too Like the Lightning. London: Head of Zeus, 2017.
Pasquale, Frank. “From Territorial to Functional Sovereignty: The
 Case of Amazon.” Open Democracy, January 5, 2018.
 https://www.opendemocracy.net/en/digitaliberties/from-territorial
to-functional-sovereignty-case-of-amazon/.
 Pettit, Philip. “The Cunning of Trust.” Philosophy & Public Affairs 24,
 no. 3 (1995): 202–225.
 Prak, Maarten. Citizens without Nations. Cambridge: Cambridge
 University Press, 2018.
 Rajagopalan, Shruti. “Blockchain and Buchanan: Code as
 Constitution.” In James M. Buchanan: A Theorist of Political
 Economy and Social Philosophy, edited by Richard Wagner, 359
381. Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan, 2018.
 Rajaniemia, Hannu. “Unchained: A Story of Love, Loss, and
 Blockchain.” 
MIT Technology Review, April 25, 2018.
 https://www.technologyreview.com/2018/04/25/143469/unchained
a-story-of-love-loss-and-blockchain/.
 Rajendra Sai, Ashish, Jim Buckley, Brian Fitzgerald, and Andrew Le
 Gear. “Taxonomy of Centralization in Public Blockchain Systems: A
 Systematic Literature Review.” Working paper, September 26, 2020.
 https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2009.12542.
 Rennie, Ellie. “Climate Change and the Legitimacy of Bitcoin.”
 Working 
paper, 
https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3961105.
 January 
2023.
 Roio, Denis J. “Bitcoin, the End of the Taboo on Money.” Dyne.Org
 Digital 
Press, 
April 
6, 
2013, 
https://median.newmediacaucus.org/isea2012-machine
wilderness/bitcom-the-end-of-the-taboo-on-money/.
 1–17.
 Rossiter, Clinton. Constitutional Dictatorship: Crisis Government in
 the Modern Democracies. New York: Routledge, 1948.
 Rousseau, Jean-Jacques. The Social Contract. Hertfordshire:
 Wordsworth Editions Limited, 1998.
 Rushkoff, Douglas. Survival of the Richest: Escape Fantasies of the
 Tech Billionaires. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2022.
 Kindle.
Samuelson, Pamela. “DRM {and, or, vs.} the Law.” Communications
 of the ACM 46, no. 4 (2003): 41–45.
 Schmidt, Vivien. Europe’s Crisis of Legitimacy: Governing by Rules
 and Ruling by Numbers in the Eurozone. Oxford: Oxford University
 Press, 2020.
 Schmitt, Carl. Political Theology: Four Chapters on the Concept of
 Sovereignty. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005.
 Schneider, Nathan. “How We Can Encode Human Rights in the
 Blockchain.” 
Noema, 
June 
7, 
2022.
 https://www.noemamag.com/how-we-can-encode-human-rights-in
the-blockchain/.
 Schneider, 
Nathan. 
Governance.” 
“Cryptoeconomics as a Limitation on
 Mirror, 
August 
11, 
2022.
 https://ntnsndr.mirror.xyz/zO27EOn9P_62jVlautpZD5hHB7ycf3Cfc
 2N6byz6DOk.
 Schochet, Gordon J. “Thomas Hobbes on the Family and the State of
 Nature.” Political Science Quarterly 82, no. 3 (September 1, 1967):
 427–445.
 Shin, Laura. The Cryptopians: Idealism, Greed, Lies, and the Making
 of the First Big Cryptocurrency Craze. New York: PublicAffairs,
 2022. Kindle.
 Simmel, Georg. “The Stranger.” In The Cultural Geography Reader,
 edited by Tim Oakes and Patricia L. Price, 311–315. New York:
 Routledge, 2008.
 Srinivasan, Balaji. The Network State: How to Start a New Country.
 Self-published, Amazon Kindle, 2022.
 Stephenson, Neal. The Diamond Age, or, Young Lady’s Illustrated
 Primer. New York: Bantam Books, 1995.
 Suzor, Nicolas. “Digital Constitutionalism: Using the Rule of Law to
 Evaluate the Legitimacy of Governance by Platforms.” Social
 Media + Society 4, no. 3 (July–September 2018): 1–11.
 Swartz, Lana. “Blockchain Dreams: Imagining Techno-Economic
 Alternatives after Bitcoin.” In Another Economy Is Possible:
 Culture and Economy in a Time of Crisis, edited by Manuel
 Castells, 82–105. Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2017.
Swartz, Lana. “Theorizing the 2017 Blockchain ICO Bubble as a
 Network Scam.” New Media and Society 24, no. 7 (2022): 1695
1713.
 Szabo, Nick. “Smart Contracts: Building Blocks for Digital Markets,
 Extropy.” Extropy: The Journal of Transhumanist Thought 16, no.
 18 (1996): 2–20.
 Szabo, Nick. “The Idea of Smart Contracts.” Nick Szabo’s Papers and
 Concise Tutorials 6, no. 1 (1997): 199.
 Szabo, Nick. “Money, Blockchains, and Social Scalability.”
 Unenumerated, 
February 
9, 
2017.
 http://unenumerated.blogspot.com/2017/02/money-blockchains-and
social-scalability.html.
 Taleb, Nassim N. The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly
 Improbable. London: Random House, 2017.
 Tan, Joshua, Max Langenkamp, Anna Weichselbraun, Ann Brody, and
 Lucia Korpas. “Constitutions of Web3.” Working paper, September
 2023. https://constitutions.metagov.org/article.
 Tomasello, Michael. Why We Cooperate. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
 2009.
 Tornado Cash. “Tornado.cash Is Finally Trustless!” Medium, May 20,
 2022. 
https://tornado-cash.medium.com/tornado-cash-is-finally
trustless-a6e119c1d1c2.
 Vidan, Gili, and Vili Lehdonvirta. “Mine the Gap: Bitcoin and the
 Maintenance of Trustlessness.” New Media and Society 21, no. 1
 (January 2019): 42–59.
 Voshmgir, Shermin. “Disrupting Governance with Blockchains and
 Smart Contracts.” Strategic Change 26, no. 5 (2017): 499–509.
 Walch, Angela. “On Code(rs) We Trust: Software Developers as
 Fiduciaries in Public Blockchains.” In Regulating Blockchain:
 Techno-Social and Legal Challenges, edited by Philipp Hacker,
 Ioannis Lianos, Georgios Dimitropoulos, and Stefan Eich, 58–82.
 Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2019.
 Waldron, Jeremy. “The Rule of Law and the Importance of
 Procedure.” Nomos 50 (2011): 3–31.
Winner, Langdon. “Do Artifacts Have Politics?” Daedalus 109, no. 1
 (Winter 1980): 121–136.
 Wood, Gavin. “Ethereum: A Secure Decentralised Generalised
 Transaction Ledger—EIP 150 Revision.” Yellow paper, 2014.
 https://gavwood.com/paper.pdf.
 May 
Wood, Gavin. “Allegality: Systems That Can’t Care.” YouTube video,
 26:30. 
14, 
v=Zh9BxYTSrGU.
 2015. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?
 Yeung, Karen. “Regulation by Blockchain: The Emerging Battle for
 Supremacy between the Code of Law and Code as Law.” Modern
 Law Review 82, no. 2 (2019): 210.
 Zargham, Michael. “Sensor Networks and Social Choice.” Working
 paper, 
2019.
 https://github.com/BlockScience/conviction/blob/master/social
sensorfusion.pdf.
 Zheng, Zibin, Shaoan Xie, Hong-Ning Dai, Weili Chen, Xiangping
 Chen, Jian Weng, and Muhammad Imran. “An Overview on Smart
 Contracts: Challenges, Advances and Platforms.” Future Generation
 Computer Systems 105 (2020): 475–491.
 Zuboff, Shoshana. The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a
 Human Future at the New Frontier of Power. London: Profile
 Books, 2019.
 OceanofPDF.com
Further Reading
 Allen, Darcy, Chris Berg, and Aaron Lane. Cryptodemocracy: How
 Blockchain Can Radically Expand Democratic Choice. Lanham,
 MD: Lexington Books, 2019.
 Brekke, Jaya Klara. “Hacker-Engineers and Their Economies: The
 Political 
Economy 
of 
Decentralised 
Networks 
and
 ‘Cryptoeconomics.’” New Political Economy 26, no. 4 (2021): 646
659. https://doi.org/10.1080/13563467.2020.1806223.
 Buterin, Vitalik. Proof of Stake. New York: Seven Stories Press, 2022.
 De Filippi, Primavera, and Aaron Wright. Blockchain and the Law:
 The Rule of Code. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2018.
 Dyzenhaus, David. Legality and Legitimacy: Carl Schmitt, Hans
 Kelsen and Herman Heller in Weimar. Oxford: Oxford University
 Press, 1997.
 DuPont, Quinn. Cryptocurrencies and Blockchains. London: John
 Wiley & Sons, 2019.
 Finck, Michèle. Blockchain Regulation and Governance in Europe.
 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2018.
 Hardin, Russell. Trust & Trustworthiness. New York: Russell Sage
 Foundation, 2004.
 Kavanagh, Donncha, and Paul Dylan-Ennis, “Cryptocurrencies and the
 Emergence of Blockocracy.” The Information Society 36, no. 5
 (2020): 290–300. https://doi.org/10.1080/01972243.2020.1795958.
 Kelsen, Hans. Pure Theory of Law. Clark, NJ: The Lawbook
 Exchange, 2005.
 Lessig, Lawrence. Code: And Other Laws of Cyberspace. New York:
 Basic Books, 2009.
 Lindahl, Hans. Fault Lines of Globalization: Legal Order and the
 Politics of A-Legality. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013.
Luhmann, Niklas. “Familiarity, Confidence, Trust: Problems and
 Alternatives.” In Trust: Making and Breaking Cooperative
 Relations, edited by Diego Gambetta, 94–107. Oxford: Oxford
 University Press, 2000.
 Ostrom, Elinor. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions
 for Collective Action. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
 1990.
 3 
Pettit, Philip. “The Cunning of Trust.” Philosophy & Public Affairs 24,
 no. 
(1995): 
4963.1995.tb00029.x.
 202–225. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1088
Schmitt, Carl. Political Theology: Four Chapters on the Concept of
 Sovereignty. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005.
 Werbach, Kevin. The Blockchain and the New Architecture of Trust.
 Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2018.
 Yeung, Karen. “Regulation by Blockchain: The Emerging Battle for
 Supremacy between the Code of Law and Code as Law.” Modern
 Law Review 82, no. 2 (2019): 207–239.
 OceanofPDF.com
Index
 The letter f following a page number denotes a figure.
 1Hive DAO, 165
 51 percent attack, 40
 Adleman, Leonard, 31
 Airbnb platform, 109, 110
 AI systems
 and blockchain-based systems, 56–57
 and the future of travel, 170–171
 Alegality, 18, 20, 127–133
 by design, 176
 Alexander the Great, 23–24
 Aligica, Paul, 69
 Alina (fictional character), 169–170
 Alston, Eric, 166
 AML regulations, 73, 128, 161, 181
 Apple, 179
 Archaeology, governance, 8
 Arendt, Hannah, 24
 Aristotle, 2–3, 10
 Asimov, Isaac, 56, 57
 Athens, ancient, 3
 Attestations, 49–50
 Authentication, 48–51
 Authority, political, 15–16
 Bankman-Fried, Sam, 147–148
 Barlow, John Perry, 8–9, 58–59, 172
 Beeple, 47–48
 Binance, 72, 180–181
 Bitcoin, 6, 12–13, 31, 185–186
 and computational energy, 39–40
 decentralized ledger, 34–35
 and digital scarcity, 45
 miners and mining, 37, 39
 motivations for creating, 32
network, launch, 32
 other blockchain-based networks, 40–41 (see also Ethereum)
 on-chain constitution of, 163
 problems solved by, 33–34
 Proof of Work (PoW) algorithm, 36
 scaling debate, 160
 tampering with blockchain, 36
 technology of, 33–40
 white paper, 9, 32
 Wikileaks episode, 91–92
 “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System” (Nakamoto), 31
 Bitcoinica, 125–127, 130
 Bitcoin Improvement Proposals (BIPs), 69, 163
 Bitcoin Magazine, 41
 BitGold, 30
 BitTorrent, 44
 Black swan, 106
 Blockchain and the Law (De Filippi and Wright), 70–71
 Blockchain communities, 10–12
 Blockchain constitutionalism, 21, 161–165
 Blockchain governance, 9–10
 challenge to conceptual understanding of law and regulation, 14–15
 as a consequential force in the world, 12–13
 and digital scarcity, 44–48
 and legal and regulatory uncertainty, 13–14
 on-chain and off-chain, 10
 paradox of, 12
 proposals for regulation, 178–186
 tools for, 43–44
 Blockchains
 authentication, 48–51
 and centralization, 174
 as a consequential force in the world, 12–13
 and current legal system, 128
 and decision-making, 51–53
 enterprise, 43
 and legal and regulatory uncertainty, 13–14
 on-chain and off-chain, 10, 50–51, 68–69
 paradox of, 12
 private, 43
 public, 43
technically distributed, 39
 tokens, 45–46
 Blocks, 32
 of transactions, 35, 38
 b-money, 30
 Bologna, 4
 Bored Ape Yacht Club, 48
 Bounded rationality, 17
 Bowles, Samuel, 86
 Brand, Stewart, 8–9
 Bush, George W., administration, 106
 Buterin, Vitalik, 41, 116, 148, 176–177
 Californian Ideology, 8
 Capitalism, 62
 Cardano, 67
 Cars, future, 170–171
 Carugati, Frederica, 8
 Cavafy, 104
 Celsius Network, 135
 Centralized issuing authority (the mint), 33–34
 Certification, modalities of, 49–50
 Charmichael, Tommy Glen, 97–98
 Chaum, David, 29, 30
 Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (US), 65
 Chokepoints, Internet, 59
 Christies’ auction house, 47–48
 Civility, 89
 Client server architecture, 34
 Cloud empires, 62
 Coalition of Automated Legal Applications (COALA), 138
 Code, leveraging, 59–61
 Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace (Lessing), 61
 “Code is law,” 14–15, 61
 Coetzee, John M., 103–104
 Coinbase, 45, 72, 126, 180–181
 Collingridge dilemma, 13–14
 Colonel Joll (fictional character), 103, 113
 Commons management, 17–18
 Computational energy, 39–40
 Confidence. See Legitimacy; Trust
 confidence machine, 20, 92–97, 100–101, 141, 174, 175
and con men, 81–86
 Confidence Man, The (Melville), 81–82, 83, 85
 Con men, 81–86
 Constitutional orders, 15
 Corporate governance, 16–17
 Cosmos, 67
 Counterterrorist financing (CTF) regulations, 181
 COVID-19 pandemic, 147
 Cryogenics, 25–26
 Crypto-Anarchist Manifesto (May), 28
 Crypto assets, property regime, of, 136–137
 Cryptocurrencies, 6, 45. See also specific examples, e.g.: Bitcoin; Ethereum
 and the extropian movement, 28–29
 Cryptopia, 171–172, 186–187
 Currency, and the extropian movement, 28–29
 Cyberspace, 6–8
 Declaration of Independence of, 58
 and the Internet, 48–61
 Cypherpunks, 9, 26–28
 DAO, The, 107–111, 137–138. See also DAO attack, The
 and alegality, 128
 and legitimacy, 152
 DAO Act (Utah), 138
 DAO attack, The, 13–14, 19, 20, 100, 114–118, 121–124
 and output leegitimacy, 159–160
 DAO Model Law, The, 138
 DApps, 52, 54
 Data integrity, 36
 Decentraland DAO, 53
 Decentralized applications. See DApps
 Decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs), 6, 42, 52–54. See also DAO attack, The
 ENS DAO constitution, 164
 and legal liability, 74
 Ooki DAO, 19, 78–79
 Decentralized finance (DeFi) platforms, 42
 Decentralized ledger, 34–35
 Decision-making centers, for blockchain networks, 66–67
 endogenous and exogenous, 67–67
 Declaration of Independence of Cyberspace (Barlow), 58
 Defence Agency Research Projects Agency (DARPA), 58
 DeFi, 73, 158
De Filippi, Primavera, 70
 Democracy, 15–16
 Diamond Age, The (Stephenson), 6–7
 DigiCash,29, 30–33
 Digital cash, 29–33
 Digital digest. See Hash
 Digital documents, authenticity of, 49
 Digital Millennium Copyright Act (US), 65
 Digital scarcity, 44–48
 Distributed consensus, 6
 Distributed ledger, 57
 Dread Pirate Roberts (Ross Ulbricht), 77–78
 Dyzenhaus, David, 113, 114, 149
 Egypt, ancient, 5
 “End of history,” 1–2
 Entropy, 24–25
 EOS, 67
 Ethereum, 40–43, 45, 185–186
 classic, 117
 and The DAO, 111, 114
 decision-making centers, 67
 Ether, 45, 114, 121, 142, 186
 hard fork, 116–118
 and the Parity bug, 121–122
 Tornado Cash, 141–145
 trust relations, 100–101
 Ethereum Foundation, 67, 116
 Ethereum Improvement Proposals (EIPs), 69, 163
 Ethereum Naming Service (ENS)
 ETH holders, 67
 European Union (EU) Council
 Markets in Crypto Assets (MiCA) regulation, 72–73
 Transfer of Funds Regulation (2023), 136
 “Everydays: The First 5,000 Days” (Beeple), 47–48
 Extropian movement, 25–26, 28
 Extropian principles, 25
 Extropy: The Journal of Transhumanist Thought, 25
 Facebook. See Meta
 Fallon, Jimmy, 182–183
 Farrell, Henry, 143
FBI, 77–78, 179
 Feudalism, 62
 Financial harm, 57
 Finney, Hal, 24–25, 31, 32–33
 Flashbots, 153–154
 Freedom of speech, 143
 Friends with Benefits DAO, 53
 FTX, 72, 134, 135, 137, 147, 181
 Fukuyama, Francis, 1–2, 3, 6
 Full nodes, 67
 Functional sovereigns, 62
 Gas auction systems, 153–154
 General Date Protection Regulation (GDPR), 65, 178
 Gibson, William, 6–7
 Gintis, Herbert, 86
 Gitcoin, 74
 GitHub, 100, 143
 Global financial system, 30–31
 crisis of 2008, 90–91
 Golems, destructive, 133–141, 145
 and alegality, 144
 Tornado Cash, 19, 141–145
 Google, 59, 178
 Governance, forms of
 archaeology of, 8
 Cambrian explosion of, 3–4
 and technology, 4–5
 Graeber, David, 3–4
 Great Firewall (China), 65
 Haber, Stuart, 31–32
 Habermas, Jürgen, 149–150
 Hamzić, Vanja, 129
 Hard forks
 and the DAO attack, 116–118, 138–139
 and legitimacy, 150–152
 Hardin, Russell, 89
 Hash, 32, 35–37, 49
 functions, 94–95
 Heller, Herman, 149–150
 Hippodamus of Miletus, 2–3
Hitler, Adolf, 113, 118
 Hives, 7–8
 Hobbes, Thomas, 3, 5, 85–86
 Howey test, 134
 Hyperledger, 43
 I, Robot (Asimov), 56
 ICANN (Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers), 162–163
 ICOs (initial coin offerings), 46, 114, 134, 135, 184
 Immortality, 23–25
 and cryogenics, 25–26
 India, 132
 Information Society Directive (European Union), 65
 Initial coin offerings (ICOs), 46
 Internet Engineering Task Force, 58
 Internet governance, 14–15, 58–63, 174. See also Blockchain governance
 governmental control, 65
 Kelsen, Hans, 106–107, 110–112, 114, 123–124, 175–176
 Kickstarter, 108
 Know your customer (KYC) regulations, 161, 181
 Kraken, 45, 72
 Kreuzberg (Bitcoinia), 126
 Kybernetes, 5
 Ledger. See Decentralized ledger; Distributed ledger; Shared ledger
 Legality, and legitimacy, 21, 149–154
 Legal system. See Alegality
 Legitimacy. See also Confidence; Trust
 Buterin on, 148, 176–177
 contingent, 155–158
 endogenous and exogenous, 154–155, 157–158
 foundational, 155–157
 in governance, 15–16, 18, 21
 and legality, 21, 149–154
 input, 158–159
 output, 158–160
 and polycentric systems, 156
 polycrisis of, 147–148
 throughput, 158–159
 Lehdonvirta, Vili, 12
 Lehman Brothers, bankruptcy of 2008, 31
 Lessing, Lawrence, 61, 64–65
Leviathan (Hobbes), 85–86
 LexDAO, 53
 Libertarian exit, 26
 Light wand, 98–99
 Lindahl, Hans, 129–130, 176
 LiteCoin, 40–41
 Luhmann, Niklas, 87, 88, 89–90
 Luhn, Hans Peter, 31
 MakerDAO, 74
 Maximum extractive value (MEV), 67, 152–154
 May, Timothy C., 28
 McGinnis, Michael, 67
 McLuhan, Marshall, 8
 Medium, 98
 Melville, Herman, 81–82, 85, 89
 Merkle, Ralph, 31
 Merkle trees, 31, 35
 Mesopotamia, 4
 Meta, 59, 162, 178
 MEV, 447, 152–154
 Miners and mining, 180
 Bitcoin, 37, 39
 Ethereum, 117
 moratorium in New York State, 158
 repressive regulations, 180
 Mint, the, 33–34
 Mirror DAO, 53
 Mittiga, Ross, 155
 Moloch DAO, 53
 Money laundering, 57
 MiCA antimoney laundering (AML) provisions, 73, 128, 161, 181
 Monkey Paw, 97
 More, Max, 25–26
 Mt. Gox, 134
 Mumford, Lewis, 5
 Musk, Elon, 179
 Nakamoto, Satoshi, 31, 32–34, 36, 83–85
 Name-Coin, 40–41
 Neuromancer (Gibson), 6–7
 Newton, Isaac, 5–6
New York Herald (newspaper), 83
 NFTs, 47–48, 72, 147
 Nonce, 37
 Nonfungible tokens (NFTs), 47–48, 72, 147
 Off-chain governance, 10
 On-chain governance, 10
 Ooki DAO, 19, 78–79
 Opportunism, 17
 Owens, Robert, 4
 Palmer, Ada, 7
 Parity bug, 120–122
 Parity multisig wallets, 120–121
 Pax Bitcoinica, 127
 PayPal, 109
 Peer-to-peer networks, 34–35
 Pettit, Philip, 89
 Phaleas of Chalcedon, 2
 Phyles, 7, 8
 Plato, 2
 Political governance, 15–17
 Politics, The (Aristotle), 2–3
 Polycentricity, 187
 Polycentric governance systems, 66–69
 Polycrisis, 147–148
 Proof of computation, 30
 Proof of stake (PoS) systems, 39–40
 Proof of work (PoW), 30, 34
 and Bitcoin, 36, 39–40
 Property regime, of crypto assets, 136–137
 Protocal rules, 161
 Pseudonymous participation, 39
 Qin Shi Huang, 23–24
 Quadratic voting, 46–47
 Queen (rock band), 23
 Rajaniemi, Hannu, 169, 171
 Reddit, 98, 115
 Regulation, proposals for, 178–186
 by code, 178, 183
 four modes of, 61
via governance, 17, 178–179
 regulatory sandboxes, 185
 Reichstag fire (1933), 113
 Rewilding the planet, 18
 Rivest, Ron, 31
 Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 3
 RPOW (anonymous currency), 30
 Rule by code, 58–65
 and legal liability, 73–74
 “Rule by law,” 63
 Rule of code, 12, 14–15, 20, 64, 66–67, 70–71
 decision-making centers, 67–68
 and legal liability, 73–75
 legal tensions, 75–79
 and rule of law, 69–70
 Rule of law, 20, 57, 63, 69–70
 Saint-Simon, 5
 Schmidt, Vivien, 158–159
 Schmitt, Carl, 104–106, 107, 111–112, 117, 119, 123–124, 176
 Schneider, Nathan, 8
 Schneier, Bruce, 143
 Science fiction, 6–8
 Security tokens, 45
 Shamir, Adi, 31
 Shared infrastructural technology, 17–18
 Shared ledger, 32
 Ship building, in the ancient world, 4
 Sienna, 4
 Silicon Valley, 8
 Silk Road, 77–78
 Simmel, Georg, 82
 Slack, 115
 Slock.it, 109, 115
 Smart contracts, 41–42, 51
 Soft forks, 116
 Solana, 43
 Solon, 3
 Sovereignty, 15–16
 Sparta, 3
 Speedy (fictional robot), 55–56
 Srinivasan, Balaji, 125, 126–127, 144
Stablecoins, 72, 147
 Staking pools, 67
 States of exception, 18
 Steem blockchain, takeover of, 19, 98–100, 101
 Stephenson, Neal, 6–7, 8
 Stornetta, Scott, 31–32
 Sun, Justin, 98–100
 Surveillance capitalism, 62
 SushiSwap, 45
 Szabo, Nick, 30, 42, 96
 Taleb, Nassim N., 106
 Tan, Joshua, 164–165
 Tarko, Vlad, 69
 Techno-feudalism, 62
 Technology, and forms of governance, 4–8
 Terra Ignota book series (Palmer), 7
 Terrorism financing, 57
 Tezos, 43, 67
 Three Laws of Robotics (Asimov’s laws), 55–56, 57
 Time stamping, digital, 32, 34
 Token-based voting, 47
 Tokens, 45–46
 nonfungible (see NFTs)
 Too Like the Lightning (Palmer), 7–8
 Tornado Cash, 19, 141–145
 sanctions, 181–182
 Tor network, 77
 Transfer of Funds Regulation (EU), 136
 Travel, future, 170–171
 Tron blockchain network, 98–99
 Trust, 10, 17, 18, 86–91. See also Confidence; Legitimacy
 bringing back, 97–101
 and the confidence machine, 20, 92–97, 100–101, 141, 174, 175
 and con men, 81–86
 Trustlessness, 10, 20, 175
 Turing machine, 5
 Tutankhamun, 23–24
 Ulbricht, Ross, 77–78
 Unchained (Rajaniemi), 169–170
 UniSwap, 45
United States
 Commodities Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), 72, 78–79
 Department of the Treasury, Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC), 142
 Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 72
 security services, 64
 Southern District of New York Bankruptcy Court, 135
 Utah, 138
 Validator nodes, 67
 Waiting for the Barbarians (Coetzee), 103–104
 Watchmaker (prime mover), 5–6
 Weber, Max, 148–149
 Wei Dai, 30
 Weimar Republic, attack on and fall of, 112–113
 Wengrow, David, 3–4
 Wikileaks, 91–92
 Winner, Langon, 139
 Wood, Gavin, 127–129, 136, 139–141
 World Trade Center, 9/11 terror attacks on, 106
 World Wide Web Consortium, 58
 Wright, Aaron, 70
 Xi Jinping, 6
 Zuckerberg, Mark, 6
 OceanofPDF.com
Primavera De Filippi is a research director at the National Center of
 Scientific Research in Paris, and faculty associate at the Berkman-Klein
 Center for Internet & Society at Harvard. Her research focuses on the legal
 challenges and opportunities of the metaverse, Web3, blockchain
 technology, and artificial intelligence. She is the coauthor of the book
 Blockchain and the Law, published in 2018 by Harvard University Press,
 and she was recently awarded a €2 million grant from the European
 Research Council to investigate how blockchain technology can help
 improve institutional governance through greater confidence and trust.
 Wessel Reijers is a postdoctoral researcher at the Department of Philosophy,
 University of Vienna. Wessel’s current research explores the impacts of
 emerging technologies on citizenship, most notably coming from social
 credit systems. Additionally, he explores the nature of distributed
 governance, investigating its potential as well as its pitfalls. He is the
 coauthor of Narrative and Technology Ethics and coeditor of the edited
 volume Interpreting Technology.
 Morshed Mannan is a postdoctoral research fellow at the Robert Schuman
 Centre for Advanced Studies, European University Institute. Morshed is
 currently conducting interdisciplinary research on blockchain governance
 and regulation, platform cooperatives, and data cooperatives. He is
 currently exploring the application of constitutional and corporate
 governance theories to blockchain governance. He is the coeditor of the
 edited volume Log Out_A Glossary of Technological Resistance and
 Decentralization, a coauthor of the COALA DAO Model Law, and a
 coauthor of Freedom of Establishment for Companies in Europe (EU/EEA).
 OceanofPDF.com